The Opening (Surah Al-Fatihah) 



® Themes of the Surah: 

This surah aims to divert one’s full focus on Allah 
making worship for Him alone 

® Explanation: 

Surah Al-Fatihah is called 'The Opening’ because 
it is the first surah of the Qur’an. In Arabic it is 
known as ‘Umm Al-Qur’an’, the foundation of 
the Qur’an, because it contains all the Qur’anic 
themes; from the principles of faith and worship, to 
stories of previous nations and other matters. The 
Prophet (peace be upon him) confirmed it to be the 
greatest surah in the Qur’an. 

@ 1 begin by calling on Allah, Who is Ar-Rahman, 
the Merciful, and Ar-RahTm, the Compassionate. 
These last two names of Allah are derived from the 
Arabic word rahmah, which means mercy: proving 
the greatness and vastness of His Mercy and that 
His Mercy surrounds everything and embraces all 
living beings. Every blessing is due to His mercy, 
and the believers receive the greatest mercy. 

@ All praise belongs to Allah with regards to His 
essence, attributes and actions, because He is the 
Creator of everything. Everything belongs to Him 
and He is the disposer of their affairs; blessing indi¬ 
viduals specifically and humans in general. 

@ Two names of Allah, Ar-Rahman and Ar-Rahlm, 
derived from the word rahmah, or mercy: indicat¬ 
ing His mercy for creation, with the believers being 
the greatest recipients of it. 

@ He is the Master of the day of Judgement, the 
day in which we will be brought back to life and 


repaid for what we have done, all of His creation will be held accountable for their actions and recompensed for them. 
On that day Allah will ask “To whom belongs the Kingdom today?” [Surah Ghafir: 16] No one, no matter how high his 
status, will answer, and then Allah will reply Himself, “to Allah, the One, the Overcomer” [Surah Ghafir: 16] 

{J) We worship and obey none except You; we associate no one with You, and from You alone do we ask for help in all 
our affairs. All goodness is in Your hand, and there is no helper except You. 

@ Show and facilitate for us the right way, the path of submission to You which has no crookedness, and make us firm 
upon it - 

© The same path as those of Your creation whom You have blessed with guidance, such as the prophets, the truthful, 
martyrs, and the righteous ones. What good companions these people make! Keep us away from the path of those who 
earned Your anger, who knew the truth and did not follow it - as was the case with the Israelites; and keep us away from 
the path of those who lost their way and were not guided, because they were neglectful in seeking the Truth and being 
guided by it - as was the case with the Christians. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Allah starts His scripture with ‘In the name of Allah’, showing us that we should start our actions and speech in this 
way, asking for His help and His aid. 

2. Surah Al-Fatihah is the greatest surah in the Qur’an, because it contains the rights that belong to Allah only, and explains the way to 
reach Him. 

3. All gratitude and praise belong to Allah, because He is the Lord of everything: He brought everyone into life; He regulates our lives; 
and cares for us through His blessings. 

4. The surah shows that faith is perfected through sincerely worshipping Allah and seeking His help alone. 

5. A Muslim needs to be careful about following the path of the People of the Book who earned Allah’s anger and became misled. 




















The Cow (Surah Al-Baqarah) 



® Themes of the Surah 

It encourages people to develop life on earth and 
establish Allah’s way; and explains the different 
types of people that exist, the principles of faith and 
the foundations of the sacred law. 

® Explanation 

The surah is called ‘The Cow’ because it contains 
the story of the cow of the Israelites. 

Alif Lam Mlm - letters like these begin cer¬ 
tain surahs of the Qur’an. Although they have no 
meaning in themselves, they do however have a 
purpose. Since there is divine wisdom contained 
in everything in the Qur’an, these letters point to 
the miracle of the Qur’an, made up of the letters 
which make up the words we speak. Therefore, 
when surahs begin with letters in this way, they are 
usually followed with a verse about the Qur’an, as 
we see in this surah. 

© This is the Qur’an, in which there is nothing 
of any doubt, neither in terms of its origin, nor in 
terms of its meaning. It is the word of Allah, guid¬ 
ing those who are mindful of Allah to the way that 
leads to Him. 

© The mindful are those who have sure faith in 
those matters which cannot be perceived through 
the senses [The Ghaib] yet Allah and His Messen¬ 
ger have informed us about, such as the Last Day. 

They perform the prayer in the manner Allah told 
them to; and spend out of what Allah has provided 
for them, in the form of obligatory charity (Zakat) 
or voluntary charity (Sadaqah), hoping for the re¬ 
ward of Allah. 

© They believe in the revelation that Allah sent down to you, O Prophet, and in that which He revealed to all the other 
prophets before you (peace be upon them), without distinction; and they have a definite belief in the Afterlife, with its 
rewards and punishments. 

© The people who possess these qualities are on the path of guidance, and will be successful in this world and the next, 
gaining what they desire and being saved from what they fear. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The Qur’an contains conclusive proof that it came from Allah, the Wise, the Knowing. 

2. It is those who are mindful of Allah and glorify Him who benefit from the great guidance within the Qur’an. 

3. Believing in [Al-Ghaib] is one of the greatest degrees of faith, because it means accepting what Allah alone knows about [the Ghaib] 
and what He has told the Prophet (peace be upon him) about it. 

Al-Ghaib: literally means the unrealisable i.e. things that are beyond our senses of touch, sight, hearing etc. This includes belief in Allah, 
Angels, Revealed Scripture, Allah’s messengers. Day of Recompense, and Al-Qadar (divine pre-ordainments). It also includes what 
Allah and His Messenger informed about the past, present and future e.g. the creation of the heavens and earth, botanical and zoological 
life, stories about the nations of the past and about Paradise and Hell etc. 

4. Allah often mentions prayer and giving Zakat together. Prayer shows sincerity to Allah, and giving Zakat shows kindness to creation. 
Together they are the route to happiness and success. 

5. Having faith in Allah and doing good works leads to guidance and success in this world and the next. 
























l21_! 




L)3o\e. 

)-&J& 0 dJ^C^ 

0 \jj 4)h\jS\e- J_jAJ 

'l\ £ tx^J^ 5 j %^=4 

l_4^ J_Jo Vp 4 0 Oj^iiiUj 

^Je'^0 i£^ Ac-^L^Jj 

>-4^ J-?^^k?0 CL?A^2ii^p-A 

5 ^\^U^J> 1 \j \S - 

b^ |j) l! i ^ \5^ \^ 1?~^ ^ *• ^ 

J^IiJJ^j!5>^_4.4li\ 0 

*\iL$d\ \j£LJ^\C j^^jX^j\ 0 oyi^Jo^^iK j 


© Those who reject what Allah revealed to His 
Messenger continue on the wrong path in their 
stubbornness. So, it makes no difference whether 
you warn them or not. 

© Allah has sealed their hearts, locking inside 
them their falsehood, and has placed a seal on their 
hearing, so that they do not listen to nor accept the 
truth. He has put a cover over their eyes, so that 
they do not see the truth in its clarity. They will suf¬ 
fer greatly. After describing the disbelievers, who 
are at fault inside and out, He describes the hypo¬ 
crites, who appear good on the outside, but are not 
so inwardly: 

© Among people are some who claim to have faith 
in Allah, when they actually do not believe. 

© They think that they can deceive Allah and the 
believers by acting outside as if they believe, while 
inside hiding their disbelief; but really, they only 
deceive themselves, without realising it. Allah 
knows all that is secret and hidden, and has told the 
believers what these people are like. 

© Allah increases the disease in their hearts, and 
they reap what they sow. Because they lied Allah 
increases the disease of doubts in their hearts, by 
adding hesitation to their uncertainty, hence they 
only gain what they deserve. They will have a pain¬ 
ful suffering in the worst parts of Hell because they 
lied against Allah, and the people, and rejected the 
message brought by Muhammad (peace be upon 
him). 

© When they are told not to ruin things on earth 
- through their rejection of the truth, their disobedi¬ 
ence and so on - they deny doing so, claiming that 


they only correct things and put them right. 

© The truth is that it is they who ruin things, but they do not admit this, nor do they know that their actions are the cause 
of all ruin. 

© When they are told to have faith as the companions of Muhammad (peace be upon him) did, they reply, looking down 
on people and making fun of them, saying “should we have faith like simple-minded people do?” In fact, it is they who 
are the fools, but they are unaware of this. 

© When the hypocrites meet the believers, they say, ‘We believe what you believe’, as they think it will benefit them if 
they act like this; but when they are alone with their leaders, they say, ‘We are really with you and follow you. We are 
only making fun of them when we say that we believe’. 

©Allah mocks the hypocrites for their mocking of the believers, and He will repay in equal measure for their behaviour. 
They are treated as believers in this world but will be repaid for their lying and deception in the next life. He allows them 
to become more and more lost and to do more and more wrong, so they remain confused and doubtful about the truth. 

© It is they who are the fools, because they exchanged faith for disbelief; and this exchange did not help them in any 
way, because they lost their faith in Allah and lost the way to the truth. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1 . Those whose hearts Allah has sealed because of their stubbornness and disbelief will not benefit from the signs of 
Allah, no matter how great they may be. 

2. Allah allows those who reject faith and do wrong to do as they please, not because He does not know what they are do¬ 
ing or is unable to stop them, but to allow them to accumulate sins for which they will be held responsible in the next life. 



















@ They are like someone who lights a fire, but 
when it has lit up what is around him, Allah takes 
away the light from the flames: leaving them in the 
darkness, unable to see. Allah shows us what the 
hypocrites are like with two examples: one relat¬ 
ed to fire, and the other to water. In the example 
related to fire, He compares them to someone 
lights a fire to illuminate things, but when 
and he thinks he will benefit from its light, it goes 
out, smouldering and leaving him in the dark. Such 
people then remain in the dark, unable to see any¬ 
thing or find a way. 

@ They are deaf: unable to hear and accept the 
truth or speak about it. They are blind to seeing the 
truth, so they do not turn back from their error. 

@ In the example related to water, a storm full of 
darkness, thunder and lightning is described. Some 
people are terrified by it and put their fingers in 
their ears because of the strength of the thunder¬ 
claps, scared of death. Allah surrounds the disbe¬ 
lievers, and has absolute power over them, so they 
cannot escape Him. 

The brightness of the lightning almost blinds 


ne who 4jjj Jkj 

f •» s’. ^ 4 ^ G. 9 *s S’ s' _ __ 


$&4£\C 




them. Whenever it flashes, lighting things up, they * 

go forward and when there is no light they remain 
in darkness, unable to move. If Allah willed, He 
could take away their hearing and their sight, in His 
absolute power over all things; and not return it to 
them because they turn away from the truth. The 
rain in the storm could be likened to the Qur’an, 
the thunderclap to its warnings, and the lightning 
to truths, appearing to them from time to time. The 
covering of their ears to the thunderclaps likened 


li 


* 


oi^\ oj^ (ytCji 

' 1 &\ 0 j' 


Al-Baqarah 


Part 1 



to their turning away from the truth, and not responding to it. The hypocrites are similar to the people in these examples 
because they receive no benefit from anything. In the example of the fire, all they receive is darkness and a smouldering 
fire. In the example of the storm-cloud, all they receive is fear and alarm because of the thunder and lightning. Similarly, 
the hypocrites see nothing in Islam except difficulty and harshness. 

Having mentioned the faithful, those who deny faith, and the hypocrites, Allah calls upon them all together, to serve Him 
alone, saying: 

@ O people, worship no one other than your Lord, because He created you and the people before you, so that you may 
save yourselves from suffering, by following His instructions and keeping away from what He has prohibited. 

@ It is He Who made the earth like a carpet spread out in front of you and it is He Who masterfully constructed the sky 
over you. Through His grace rain falls, producing different crops from the earth, as produce for you. Do not, then, con¬ 
sider others to be equal to Allah, when you know that He alone is worthy of being worshipped. 

@ Allah challenges those who have any doubt about the Qur’an revealed to His servant, Muhammad (peace be upon 
him), to produce a chapter just like it, and to call their helpers, if they are truthful about what they say. 

(jjj) If they are unable to do so - and they will never be able to do it - they should be mindful of the fire of Hell, which 
bums with people who deserve the torment, and with the idols which they used to worship instead of Allah: punishing 
both the idol-worshipers and what they worshiped. The fire of Hell has been prepared as a punishment for the disbeliev¬ 
ers. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Allah leaves the hypocrites in their greatest need, as repayment for their hypocrisy and for turning away from guidance. 

2. We should worship Allah alone Who created for us everything that is in the universe and put them at our service. 

3. The inability of people to produce anything similar to a surah of the Qur’an shows that it came down from Allah, the 
Wise and Knowing. 

















ij£jj Ul^==^4-^^ ^ Cjt^j^r 

t, -<*> ^ y ^ ^ o 2 

LD c5^i^ \A2-&\a) I 3 tijj 

1 

^ iu\Aj-^4j^\ ^\j\ \iU jpjt 

Z Aj ^\i^==^ ^ 4 j 

^C - ^.f < *< ^ ^ ^ 

»{Jv)> 




\o c 's^ji p* 

4i'^H'4 | 


@ The warnings in the previous verses were for 
the disbelievers, so now the Messenger is told to 
address the believers: Give good news to those who 
have faith in Allah and do good, and tell them about 
that which will please them: gardens in Paradise, 
with rivers flowing beneath their palaces and trees. 
Whenever they are given fruits from the gardens to 
consume, they will comment on how similar they 
are to the fruits of the earth, saying, ‘This is similar 
to what we had before’. They will be given fruits 
that carry the same name and shape, so that they 
may recognise and desire them, but they will in fact 
taste differently. In the Garden they will be paired 
with their mates, who will not have any unpleasant 
traits that people have on earth; and they will live 
there in eternal bliss, unlike the bliss of the earth 
which is only temporary. 

@ Allah does not shy away from using whatever 
example He wishes, whether that be of a gnat or an¬ 
ything bigger than it. The believers know and trust 
that there is wisdom in the use of such examples, 
while the disbelievers will make fun, asking each 
other why Allah uses examples with lowly crea¬ 
tures, such as gnats, flies and spiders. Allah replies 
that in these examples lie guidance, direction and a 
test for people. There are many people who are mis¬ 
guided by Allah through these examples, because 
they refuse to consider them; and there are many 
who He guides along the right path because they 
learn from them. He does not misguide anyone ex¬ 
cept those who deserve to be misguided. They are 
those who do not obey Him. 

@ Those who break the promise they made with 
Allah to serve Him alone and follow His way. This is in the verse, “He made them testify concerning themselves: “Am I 
not your Lord?” They said, “Yes, we bear witness!” (7:172) He affirmed this by sending the prophets and the scriptures. 
Those who do not take their promises with Allah seriously are those who cut off from things which Allah instructed not 
to, such as blood relations and they work to spread corruption on earth through their wrongdoing. They are the losers in 
this world and the next. 

@ Strange is the situation of the disbelievers. How can you disbelieve the Oneness of Allah when you can see the signs 
of His power in your own existence? You were nothing, and He brought you to life; then you will die, and you shall be 
brought to life again. Then you will return to Him and be held accountable. 

@ It is Allah alone Who created everything on earth for you: the countless rivers, trees and so on, from which you benefit 
and enjoy. Then He turned to the sky, making it into seven heavens, and He has knowledge of everything. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The pleasures of the Garden are not spoiled by anything, nor mixed with any hardship. 

2. The examples Allah uses are only of benefit to the believers, because they really wish to be guided, and truly ask to 
be guided. 

3. The most obvious features of those who deviate from the truth are that they break their promises with Allah and His 
creation, leave what Allah told them to hold on to and their actions cause trouble on the earth. 

4. The origin of things is that they are allowed and pure - unless the sacred law prohibits them - because Allah blessed 
humanity, making everything on the earth for them. 


yJjjik====u 


Al-Baqarah 


Part 1 



















j ij 



1 


@ Allah tells His Prophet and humankind that He 
said to the angels that He would put humans on 
earth who will give birth to other humans, to inhab¬ 
it it according to His laws. The angels asked their 
Lord, trying to understand, what the wisdom behind 
making the children of Adam guardians of the earth 
was, when they would ruin things in it, and kill in 
it, while the angels always do as He tells them, and 
recognise His greatness, praising Him and honour¬ 
ing His power and perfection. Allah replied to their 
question, saying that He knew the deep wisdom be¬ 
hind His creation of them, and behind making them 
guardians, and the angels did not. 

@ To reveal the position of Adam, Allah taught 
him the names of everything, living things and ob¬ 
jects, their pronunciation and meanings. Then he 
put them before the angels, instructing them to tell 
Him the names if they were telling the truth when 
they said that they were a nobler and better creation 
than Adam. 

(jjj) Recognising their shortcomings and that 
everything comes from Allah, they said that they 
acknowledged that His judgement and sacred law 
could not be doubted, and that they had no knowl¬ 
edge except for the knowledge He had given them, 
accepting that He is the Knowing, from Whom 
nothing is hidden, and the Wise in His decrees and 
laws. 

@ Then Allah told Adam to tell them the names. 

When Adam told the angels the names of things, as 
he had been taught, Allah reminded the angels that 
He had told them that He knew everything hidden 
in the heavens and the earth, and what they made 
public and what they said inside of themselves. 

Allah reveals that He told the angels to prostrate to Adam out of recognition and respect, so they prostrated to him, 
eager to do as He told them, except for Iblls, or Satan, who was originally from the jinn. Due to the excellence of his wor¬ 
ship, Allah had entered Iblls into the company of the angels; but he then returned to his lowly nature, refusing to prostrate 
as Allah told him to, and becoming proud towards Adam, leading to him becoming a disbeliever. 

@ Allah told Adam to live with his wife, Eve, in the Garden, with nothing to ruin their bliss. They were instructed to 
consume the delightful food from anywhere in the Garden, but also to avoid going near a particular tree which they were 
forbidden to eat from. If they ate from the prohibited tree, they would become wrongdoers for disobeying Him. 

@) Satan did not stop whispering to them, trying to trick them, until he made them slip and fall by eating from the tree 
which Allah had told them not to. For this Allah sent them out of the Garden, telling them and Satan to go down to the 
earth, some of them enemies to others, where they would stay and live, enjoying the good things there until their lifespan, 
and until the Final Hour arrived. 

Adam received the words given to him by Allah and was inspired to ask for forgiveness with them. These words of 
forgiveness are mentioned in Surah Al-A‘raf: 23: ‘They said, “Our Lord, we have wronged ourselves. If You do not 
forgive us and have mercy on us, we will certainly be of the losers’”. Allah accepted Adam’s turning to Him and forgave 
him, for He is always forgiving and Merciful towards His creation. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Even if we cannot identify Allah’s wisdom behind some of His creation or His sacred law, we must still trust that there 
is a divine wisdom which we do not know. 

2. The Qur’an gives a high status to knowledge, making it a measure of people’s value. 

3. Pride is the root of disobedience, and the base of every difficulty sent down upon creation. It was the first sin, causing 
rebellion against Allah. 


AJ£_J 


















i?^5i-^ L?($) oyj, 


i^(^j^>- V^-^5 V dL23j\ 

cSi 1 c§r^ 

liX^ cly\ U-) Hli' 

Jj'' t*J. 

^ 40 9 

s«!>» 


fjl 


S' 


1<^J 0 ' 


i^’i 


J^i 


^>1? 




Cry*^>J \ (JpS ^a^Osi X?Vj^X.-oCL-Z ^ 1 


© Allah told them to go down together from the 
Garden to the earth, and said that when He sends 
guidance, through the prophets, those who follow it 
and have faith in His prophets will have nothing to 
fear in the world to come, and will not feel sorrow 
about what passed them by on earth. 

© As for those who disbelieve and deny His signs, 
they are the people of the fire of Hell, who will live 
there eternally. 

© O Children of the Prophet Jacob, remember the 
many blessings He gave you and be thankful for 
them. Fulfil your contract to Him, having faith in 
Him, His prophets and His sacred laws. If you fulfil 
your contract, He will fulfil His contract to you, as 
well as His promises to you of a good life on earth 
and a beautiful reward on the Day of Judgement. 
Fear Him alone and do not break His contract. 

© Also, have faith in the Qur’an which Allah re¬ 
vealed to Muhammad (peace be upon him) confirm¬ 
ing what came in the Torah, before its corruption, 
concerning the Oneness of Allah and the propheth- 
ood of Muhammad (peace be upon him), and do not 
be the first group to disbelieve. Do not exchange 
His signs - the verses which He has revealed - for 
the small price of position or leadership, and avoid 
His displeasure and punishment. 

© Do not hide the truth, which He revealed to His 
prophets, with lies and falsehood; and do not hide 
the truth of the description of Muhammad which 
came in His scripture, when you know what the 
truth is and are convinced of it. 

© Establish the prayers properly with its obligato¬ 
ry and recommended parts; give Zakat from your 
wealth, which Allah has put in your hands; and be humble to Allah with those who are humble of Muhammad’s nation 
(peace be upon him). 

© What is more immoral than telling others to have faith and do good when you, upon reading the Torah, turn away from 
it and forget it yourselves, while knowing that it orders you to follow Allah’s religion and have faith in His prophets? 
Have you then no sense? 

© Ask for help in sacred and worldly affairs, with patience and prayer, which bring you close to Allah and allow you 
to reach Him, so that He will help you, protect you and take away your difficulties. Prayer is a hardship except for those 
who are humble to their Lord. 

© The humble are convinced that they will meet their Lord on the Day of Judgement, that they are returning to Him and 
will be held accountable for their actions. 

© O Israelites, remember the sacred and worldly blessings which I gave to you, and that I favoured you over all those of 
your time in terms of prophethood and power. 

© Protect yourselves against the Day of Judgement by following Allah’s instructions and staying away from what He has 
prohibited. On that day no soul will be able to help another in any way, and no pleading on their behalf will be accepted 
to benefit them or protect them from harm, except with Allah’s permission, and no ransom will be taken, even if it were 
to be the earth filled with gold. They will have no helpers on that day. Without appeal, ransom or helper, to where will 
they turn? 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. One of the most disgraceful things is to tell people to do good while not doing it yourself. 

2. Patience and prayer are two of the most helpful actions for easing the servant’s affairs. 

3. On the Day of Judgement, appeals and ransoms will not remove the punishment from anyone: only their good actions 
will benefit them. 


S 


Al-Baqarah 


Part 1 
















| ij 1 


A 





@ O Israelites! Remember when Allah saved you 
from the people of Pharaoh, who were tormenting 
you, slaughtering your sons so you would not sur¬ 
vive, and letting your women live so they could 
serve them, taking great pains to humiliate and in¬ 
sult you. When you were saved from the oppression 
of Pharaoh and his people, it was a great test for you 
from your Lord, to see if you would be thankful. 

@ Remember Allah’s favour in saving you when 
He parted the sea and made it a dry path for you to 
go through, while drowning your enemies, Pharaoh 
and his followers, before your very eyes, as you 
looked on. 

@1 Also, remember that the forty nights appoint¬ 
ed to Moses were from the blessings of Allah, in 
which the revelation of the Torah, with its light and 
guidance, was completed. Yet you went and wor¬ 
shipped the calf during that period, which made 
you into wrongdoers. 

(Sj§j) Then Allah forgave you when you asked for 
forgiveness, and did not take you to account for it, 
so that you might be thankful to Him, worshipping 
Him in the best way and doing as He instructed. 

Also, remember that Allah’s giving Moses 
(peace be upon him) the Torah as a criterion be¬ 
tween truth and falsehood, discriminating between 
guidance and misguidance, so that you might be 
guided to the truth through it, were from the bless¬ 
ings of Allah. 

@ Also, remember that Allah’s allowing you to 
ask His forgiveness for worshipping the calf, when 
Moses (peace be upon him) told you that you had 
wronged yourselves by taking the calf as a Allah 
and worshipping it, were from the blessings of Allah. Moses told you to ask for forgiveness and repent to your Creator by 
some of you killing others, because turning to Him in this way was better for you than persisting in disbelief, which would 
lead to an eternity in the fire of Hell. So, you did this with Allah’s approval, and He forgave you, for He is Forgiving and 
Merciful with His servants. 

Also, remember when you shamelessly addressed Moses (peace be upon him), saying that you would not believe him 
until you saw Allah with your own eyes, in the open before you, and the lightning struck you and killed you, whilst some 
of you looked at the others. 

Then He brought you back to life after death so that you might be thankful to Him for the blessings He granted you 
in this way. 

Another of Allah’s blessings was that He sent clouds to shade you from the heat of the sun when you were wandering 
the earth; and He sent down manna, a sweet drink similar to honey, and quails for you, telling you to consume of the good 
things He had provided you with. Their ingratitude and disbelief for these blessings did not affect Allah in any way, but 
they wronged themselves, losing their share from the good they had done and exposing themselves to suffering. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The Israelites received many great blessings from Allah, which only increased their pride and stubbornness. 

2. The verses show the vast extent of His patience and mercy with His servants, even if they do great wrong. 

3. Revelation is the criterion between truth and falsehood. 


d^====id> ISlLk} 0 


% *4 


0Oya 


ut 



























| jy_ & J' | 




\ 


djp Remember, from Allah’s blessings upon you, 
when He told you to enter Jerusalem and abundant¬ 
ly consume, with ease, from the good things in it 
from any place you wanted. He told you to prostrate 
in humility to Him when you entered, asking Him 
to remove your sins, so that He might answer you, 
and increase those who do good actions, rewarding 
them in this way. 

@ The wrongdoers among them changed what 
they were told to do and say, and entered dragging 
themselves on their rears, saying, ‘A grain in a 
hair’, mocking Allah’s sacred law. Due to their ac¬ 
tions He sent down a torment from the sky upon the 
wrongdoers among them, because they trespassed 
over the limits of the law and disobeyed His com¬ 
mand. 

(jp Remember, from Allah’s blessings upon you, 
when you were in the wilderness, and you suffered 
great thirst, so Moses prayed to his Lord and asked 
that He give you water. Allah commanded that he 
hit the rock with his stick, and when he hit it, twelve 
springs appeared from it, the same number as the 
number of your tribes. Water gushed from them, 
and Allah made clear to each tribe which was their 
spring to drink from, so that there would be no con¬ 
flict between you. And He told you to eat and drink 
from what He provided for you, without any effort 
or work from you, and told you not to put your ef¬ 
forts into ruining things on earth. 

@ Also, remember when you were ungrateful for 
the blessings of your Lord, and became tired of the 
manna and quails He sent down to you, and said 
that you would not put up with one type of food. So, 
you asked Moses (peace be upon him) to ask Allah to produce herbs, vegetables, cucumbers, grains, lentils and onions 
from the plants on earth for you to consume. Moses said, disapproving of your request, that you wanted to exchange 
manna and quails which were better and nobler and came to you without effort or work, for what was lesser and worse. 
You were told to go down from this land to any town, and that you would find what you had asked for in its fields and 
markets. Due to following whims and repeatedly turning away from what Allah chose for them, they were disgraced, giv¬ 
en poverty and misery. They earned Allah’s anger, because they turned away from His religion, and disbelieved His signs, 
and unjustly and brutally killed His prophets - all because they rebelled against Allah and used to transgress His limits. 
® Beneficial Points: 

1. Those who manipulate and distort the texts of sacred law, as the Israelites did, will get what they deserve from Allah. 

2. Mocking the sacred law of Allah deserves a severe punishment. 

3. The verses highlight the great favour Allah showed to the Israelites, and their great ingratitude, stubbornness and turn¬ 
ing away from Allah and His laws in return. 

4. We should be extremely grateful when given great blessings. Ingratitude for these blessings is a great wrong and de¬ 
serves a stem punishment. 

5. The verses state the severe misfortune that results from people rebelling against and transgressing the limits of Allah, 
bringing humiliation and shame to the offenders and allowing their enemies to have power over them. 



0 Cjt-^Jed JejH ' ^3 d i3_3j 

id & 

















r»cx&\c>i 

\ il30O yyJ^^^lj 
jp\i 1*1? Jc^-o^i^' 

^ -£il rf-1 / ^ j “i * \ ^ \ ^ ^ 

Cjt jJJ>^ _• iLi^J4Ji( J-3aS SjjiS <%' i ^ Si 




@ Those who have faith from the nation of Mu¬ 
hammad (peace be upon him) and from the com¬ 
munities who came before him - from the Jews, the 
Christians and Sabians (said to be a group who fol¬ 
lowed prophets who were of the faith of Abraham, 
peace be upon him) - will have their reward with 
their Lord. They will not fear what awaits them 
in the Afterlife, nor grieve over what happened to 
them on earth. This was the case before the Proph¬ 
et Muhammad (peace be upon him) was sent. Now 
his message of Islam - devotion and dedication to 
Allah - is the only way of life accepted by Allah, as 
He said, ‘Whoever seeks a path other than Islam, it 
will not be accepted from him’ [ Surah Al Imran: 

85]. 

@ Remember when Allah made a contract with 
you: that you should have faith in Allah and His 
prophets. He raised the mountain over you, in¬ 
spiring awe and warning you against breaking the 
contract, commanding you to take what He had re¬ 
vealed to you of the Torah seriously and carefully, 
not taking it for granted or being lazy about it. He 
told you to remember and reflect upon it, so that 
you might be careful about what you earn from Al¬ 
lah. 

@ Yet after making a firm promise, you broke the 
contract and rebelled. If it had not been for Allah’s 
favour in His tolerance towards you, and His mer¬ 
cy, accepting when you asked for forgiveness, then 
you would be among the losers because of your 
turning away and rebellion. 

You know well the story of your ancestors, who 
prepared to fish on the Sabbath when they were not 
allowed to do so, and did so through trickery. They set up nets in preparation for the Sabbath so Allah made them into 
monkeys, rejected and cast out, because of their trickery. 

j§j) Allah made this village, which had transgressed the limits, an example to the surrounding villages, and an example to 
those who came after it, so that they would not do the same and deserve the same fate. He made it a reminder for those 
mindful of Allah, who are careful of facing the consequences of their actions in the life to come, and are mindful of Al¬ 
lah’s repayment for those who transgress the limits. 

@ From the stories of your ancestors, remember what happened between them and Moses (peace be upon him) when he 
told them that Allah had instructed them to slaughter a cow. Instead of hurrying to do so, they said, stubbornly, ‘Are you 
making fun of us?’ Moses replied that he asked for Allah’s protection from being one of the ignorant people, who lied 
about Allah, and made fun of other people. 

(Sj) They asked Moses to call on his Lord to clarify what the cow they had been told to sacrifice was like. Moses told 
them that Allah said that it was neither old nor young, but was between the two; and he told them to do what Allah had 
instructed them to. 

@ They continued debating and being stubborn, telling Moses (peace be upon him) to call on his Lord to make clear to 
them the colour of the cow. Moses told them that Allah said that it was a yellow cow, with a very strong colour, which 
was pleasing to everyone who saw it. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Allah sometimes punishes disobedient people in this life, before the Afterlife, as a way of cautioning other people, so 
that they are careful of going against Allah’s sacred law. 

2. Trying to cheat the sacred law is forbidden, because Allah is not deceived. 

3. When people would make open matters of the sacred law more difficult and strict for themselves than they are, Allah 
would sometimes make things even stricter for them as a result. 


c jt^ £<$) 


Al-Baqarah 




Part 1 



















j 0 l) 
5 ^Lh^ 

Aj^) oJ£>jA\jz\^^ ja 

Jy*j£^>j&zAA ^ 



<^XXLj\ ■ 


@ They continued in their stubbornness, telling 
Moses to ask Allah to further clarify the nature of 
the cow. They said that there were many cows fit¬ 
ting the description, and they could not therefore 
identify it, insisting that they would then, if Allah 
willed, be guided to the right cow for sacrifice. 
@ Then Moses told them that Allah said the cow 
was not used for ploughing or irrigating the earth; 
she had no faults, and no marks of a different colour 
other than her yellow. They then replied that now 
he had brought them a detailed description, cor¬ 
rectly identifying the cow. They sacrificed it, after 
almost not having done it, due to all their arguing 
and stubbornness. 

@ Allah reminds the Israelites about when they 
killed one of their own. They accused each other 
of it, each rejecting the accusation of having killed 
him, and accusing someone else, until they fought. 
But Allah revealed what they were hiding about the 
murder of the innocent person. 

@ Allah told them to hit the murdered man with a 
piece of the cow which they had been told to sac¬ 
rifice. He would then bring him to life to tell them 
who the murderer was. They did this and he told 
them who had killed him. As this man was brought 
back to life by Allah, so will He bring the dead 
back to life on the Day of Judgement. Allah gives 
humanity clear signs of His power, to make them 
reflect and understand, and have true faith in Him. 
@ Their hearts became hard after these great les¬ 
sons and incredible miracles, until they became like 
rocks, and even harder than rocks, because they 
Al-Baqarah ^ ^_ Part l _ never changed, whereas rocks change and trans¬ 

form. Rivers spring from some rocks, and some split, and water comes out of them, gushing and flowing on the earth, 
benefiting people and animals. And some rocks fall from the heights of the mountains in awe of Allah. But their hearts 
were not like that. Allah is not unaware of anything we do, but knows everything, and will hold us to account for it. 
@ O believers, do not expect, after knowing their true nature and how stubborn they are, that they will be truthful and re¬ 
spond to you. A group of their scholars heard the word of Allah, revealed to them in the Torah, and then changed its words 
and meanings after they had understood what it really meant; and they did this fully aware of the seriousness of the crime. 
@ An instance of their inconsistencies and deviousness occurred when some of them met some believers and acknowl¬ 
edged the truth of the Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him), and the correctness of his message, as the Torah wit¬ 
nessed to it. But when they were alone with one another they blamed each other because of these acknowledgments, 
saying that the Muslims might use them as proof that they recognised the truth of Muhammad’s prophethood. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Some people have hearts harder than stone, unmoved by good advice or compassion. 

2. Signs of Allah, even if they are great, do not benefit someone if their heart does not surrender in awe of Allah. 

3. These verses exposed the true nature of the Israelites: they have inherited habits of carelessness, deception and manip¬ 
ulation of religion. 


\&i 

jSj ($) 

^ x-" f } ^ o»^ 'f'' f"" ^ 9 ^ 



















@ They behave in this pathetic manner as if they 
are unaware that Allah knows what they hide, in 
terms of what they say and do, and what they re¬ 
veal; but He will reveal it and expose them. 

(jjj) A group of them do not know how to read or 
write and do not know what is in the Torah or what 
it says. They have only lies which they heard from 
some of their leaders, and think it is the Torah re¬ 
vealed by Allah. 

@) Misery and great suffering awaits those who 
write the scripture with their own hands, and then 
say, falsely, that it comes from Allah, exchanging 
the truth and guidance for a small gain in this world, 
such as money or leadership. They will experience 
misery and suffering because of what their hands 
have written, through which they told lies about Al¬ 
lah, and for whatever wealth or leadership they may 
gain through these lies. 

(j§j) They say, falsely, that the fire of Hell will not 
touch them and they will not be in it except for a 
few days. Ask them, O Muhammad, if they have 
had a promise from Allah that this will be the case: 
if they have had a promise, then Allah will not 
break His contract; or ask them if they are saying 
about Allah what they do not know. 

@ It is not as they imagine. Allah repays those who 
reach the evil of disbelief, and whose disobedience 
dominates them, with suffering in the fire of Hell, 
where they will live eternally. 

@ So those who have faith in Allah and His Proph¬ 
et, and do good, will be rewarded with entry into 
the Garden, where they will live eternally. 

@ Remember the promise made between Allah 





\ dJL2Jj\ I 




Al-Baqarah 


and the Israelites: to worship Him alone; to be kind to parents, relatives, orphans and the poor; to say good words to 
people, telling them to do what is right and not what is wrong, without harshness or severity; to perform the prayer as 
instructed; and to give Zakat to those who have a right to it. But all they did after making this promise was to turn away, 
rejecting the promise they had made. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Some of the People of the Scripture claim knowledge of what Allah has revealed, when they do not really have knowl¬ 
edge of it, and what they say is only from their imagination and ignorance. 

2. Some of the greatest wrongdoers are those who lie about Allah and His Messenger. 

3. The favours and blessings that Allah gave to the Israelites made them lose their way, because they thought, not under¬ 
standing Allah and His divine wisdom, that He would not punish them after He had given them such blessings. 

4. The great promises that the Israelites made with Allah only made them turn away more, due to their rejection of them. 





















^J'3 x£\jjSy [ ^4^ 3_4^1*>j£^io 05,>-^ 

" A<&'. * 


-^o4j 


(jp Remember the contract Allah made with you in 
the Torah: forbidding you from killing each other 
and forcing people to leave their homes. You ad¬ 
mitted the contract, and you witnessed its validity. 
@ Then you broke the contract: some of you kill¬ 
ing others, and forcing a group of them to leave 
their homes, assisted by their enemies, unjustly and 
with aggression. Then if prisoners came to you in 
the hands of enemies, you pay their ransom and res¬ 
cue them from their captivity, even though making 
them leave their homes was forbidden to you. How 
is it that you believe in some of what is in the Torah 
about the ransom of captives, and reject some of 
it (about not killing each other and driving people 
from where they live)? For those of you who do 
that, there is only humiliation in this life and the 
most severe torment in the Afterlife. Allah knows 
what you do; in fact, He is fully aware, and He will 
hold you to account. 

(Sf§5 They are the people who exchange the Afterlife 
for this life, preferring what is temporary to what is 
eternal. Their suffering will not be lightened, and 
they will have no one to help them. 

@ Allah gave Moses the Torah, and followed him 
with other messengers. He gave Jesus, the son of 
Mary, clear signs of the truth of what he came with, 
such as bringing the dead back to life and healing 
the blind and the lepers, and He strengthened him 
with the angel Gabriel, the Holy Spirit (peace be 
upon him). Yet is it, O Israelites, that whenever a 
messenger comes to you from Allah with what does 
not agree with your whims, you become full of 
pride towards the truth, looking down on the mes¬ 
sengers of Allah? Do you reject a group of them and kill a group of them? 

@ The Israelites argued that their stubbornness was because their hearts were wrapped in a cover, so that none of what 
was said to them could reach them, or make sense to them. On the contrary, Allah deprived them of His mercy due to their 
disbelief, so that they will not have faith. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. One of the worst forms of disbelief is to have faith in one part of Allah’s scripture and to then reject other parts of it. 
Whoever does this has made their own desires into their Allah. 

2. Some of the Israelites exchanged the Afterlife for worldly prestige, as a result of stubbornness, following their own 
desires, and manipulating what Allah had revealed to them. 

3. It is from Allah’s blessings and mercy to His creation that He sent many messengers and scriptures to guide them. 

4. Allah repays those who turn away from guidance and stubbornly refuse to obey with a seal on their hearts, depriving 
them of His mercy. As a result, they will not be guided to the truth, and will not act according to it. 


\^=====l^. dAVi 



A1-] 


Baqarah 



















@ The Qur’an came to them from Allah, agreeing 
with the universal true principles of the Torah and 
the Gospel. Before it was revealed, they used to 
say that they would be helped against the idolaters, 
who worship others alongside Allah, and would 
have success over them when a prophet was sent, 
since they would have faith in him and follow him. 

But when the Qur’an and Muhammad (peace be 
upon him) came to them, according to the descrip¬ 
tion they recognised and the truth they knew, they 
disbelieved him. Allah curses those who disbelieve 
Him and His Prophet. 

(jjj) How miserable is what they accepted in ex¬ 
change for their portion of faith in Allah and His 
messengers. They disbelieved what Allah revealed, 
and unjustly and enviously rejected His prophets, 
because He gave prophethood and the Qur’an to 
Muhammad (peace be upon him). For disbelieving 
in Muhammad (peace be upon him) and for dis¬ 
torting the Torah beforehand, they deserved anger 
upon anger from Allah. A humiliating torment on 
the Day of Judgement will meet those who disbe¬ 
lieved in the prophethood of Muhammad (peace be 
upon him). 

@) When this group of Jews was told to have faith 
in the truth and guidance that Allah revealed to His 
Prophet, they said that they believed in what had 
been revealed to their prophets, and denied any¬ 
thing besides this, and in what was revealed to Mu¬ 
hammad (peace be upon him), although the Qur’an 
is the truth, confirming what Allah had already re¬ 
vealed to them. Had they truly believed in what had 
been revealed to them, they would have believed in 
the Qur’an. So, ask them then, O Muhammad, why they killed the prophets of Allah before, if they really had faith in the 
truth they brought to them. 

@ And also, your prophet Moses (peace be upon him), brought clear signs to you, proving that what he said was true. But 
after that you made the calf into a Allah and worshipped it, when Moses had gone to meet his Lord. You were wrongdoers 
for worshipping others alongside Allah, since only He is worthy of worship. 

@ Remember when you made a binding promise with Allah to follow Moses, peace be upon him, and to accept what 
he brought from Allah. Allah raised the mountain over you so that you were awestruck, and told you to hold tightly and 
seriously to the scripture He had sent you, and to listen and follow what was revealed to you, if not Allah would make the 
mountain fall upon you, you said that you heard with your ears and rebelled in your actions. The worship of the calf took 
hold of their hearts because of their denial and ingratitude. O Muhammad, what their faith commands them to do is evil: 
disbelieving and turning away from what Allah instructs them to do - if they have any faith at all - because if they truly 
had faith they would not disbelieve and turn away from it. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The Jews were so jealous because the Prophet (peace be upon him) was not one of them that it led them to disbelieve 
in Allah and reject what He revealed. 

2. The Jews knew that what was revealed to the Prophet was completely true, but they disbelieved it out of envy and 
outrage. 

3. Having real faith in Allah means believing in all the scriptures He revealed, and in all the messengers He sent. 

4. Turning away from truth and guidance when you know it to be true, and have had proof of it being so, is one of the 
biggest wrongs you can commit. 

5. Despite the many binding promises and contracts Allah made with the Israelites, they broke them and went back on 
their promises many times. 




Ui 


f J *** 'f r" 9 o -9^' . _ . 

_=»—_is 

\& l\. 

























@> Say, O Prophet: Jews, if Paradise in the Afterlife 
^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ g, is just for you, and no other people will enter it, then 

,y^ 2_ ^^yL. ^iv\ aJ^A2§ \^\a\\ J^^-t= >\ JS ||h wish for death, and ask for it, so that you reach this 

place quickly, and can rest from the burdens and 
worries of the life of this world, if you are truthful 
about what you claim. 

@> They will never wish for death, because of what 
they have done in their lives: disbelieving in Allah, 
rejecting His prophets and distorting His scriptures. 
Allah knows the wrongdoers among them and other 
people: each person will be given what they have 
earned. 

{j) You will find, O Prophet, that the Jews are the 
most desirous for life, even if it is miserable and 
lowly. They are even greedier for it than the idol¬ 
aters, who worship others alongside Allah, who do 
not believe in being brought back to life after death 
or in being held to account for what they have done. 
Despite being People of the Scripture, and believing 
in the resurrection and the reckoning, they would 
love to live a thousand years. Yet however long a 
life they might be given, it would not distance them 
from Allah’s punishment. Allah sees all that they do. 
Nothing is hidden from Him, and they will be given 
what they earn. 

Say, O Muhammad, to those of the Jews who 
say that Gabriel is their enemy among the angels, 
that whoever is against Gabriel - who revealed 
the Qur’an to your heart, with Allah’s permission, 
affirming the sacred scripture that came before it, 
such as the Torah and the Gospel, showing the way 
to what is good, and bringing the good news to the 
believers of the bliss Allah has prepared for them - 

then he is misguided. 

@ Whoever stands against Allah, His angels and His prophets, and against His two angels Gabriel and Michael, then 
certainly Allah is a rival to the disbelievers from among you, and from other than you. Certain defeat faces whoever has 
Allah as his rival. 

(jj) I have revealed to you, O Prophet, clear signs proving the truth of your prophethood and revelation. The only people 
who reject these signs, despite its clarity, are those who have abandoned Allah’s path. 

(Sj| Due to their corrupt state, a group of the Jews would always break any commitment that they made, including the duty 
to have faith in what the Torah revealed about the prophethood of Muhammad (peace be upon him). Most of them do 
not really have faith in what Allah revealed, because faith leads to keeping to and honouring commitments and promises. 
@ When Muhammad (peace be upon him) came to them as a prophet from Allah, and he fitted the Torah’s description 
of him, a group of them turned away from the scripture that showed this, throwing it behind their backs, unmindful of it, 
not benefitting from its truth or guidance, like fools. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The faithful wish for eternal bliss with Allah, and for this reason look forward to meeting Him, and do not fear death. 

2. The verses show the greed of some Jews for the life of this world, even if it is a life of humiliation and disgrace. 

3. Whoever makes an enemy of the close friends of Allah, he will become an enemy of Allah. 

4. Some Jews turned away from the prophethood of Muhammad (peace be upon him) despite their scriptures informing 
them that he was truly a prophet. 

5. A person who does not benefit from his knowledge can accurately be described as ignorant, because his state is like 
that of an ignorant person. 


*/u * "f 7 ^ ^ j 9 ^ ^ i J 



















(jfl When they left the path of Allah, they followed 
instead what the satans said: lying about the king¬ 
dom of the Prophet Solomon (peace be upon him) 
by claiming that it was established through black 
magic. Solomon did not disbelieve by practicing 
black magic, as the Jews claimed; but the satans 
were disbelievers when they taught people the 
black magic revealed to the two angels, Harut and 
Marut, in the city of Babel in Iraq. These two an¬ 
gels would only teach black magic to someone after 
explaining that they were simply a trial and a test 
for people, warning them not to be ungrateful to Al¬ 
lah by learning it. Those who learned black magic 
from them but did not listen to their advice would, 
through it, separate a man and his wife by sowing 
hatred between them. These sorcerers are not able 
to harm anyone except with Allah’s permission and 
by His will. They learn what harms them and does 
not benefit them. 

This group of Jews knew that whoever exchanges 
the scripture of Allah for black magic will have no 
portion in the Afterlife. What an evil thing they sold 
their souls for when they exchanged the revelation 
and sacred law of Allah for black magic! If they 
had known what would benefit them, they would 
not have done something so disgraceful and clearly 
misguided. 

fH If the Jews had really had faith in Allah, and 
been mindful to obey His sacred law and not rebel, 

His reward would have been far better for them, if 
they only knew. 

(j|| Allah directs the believers to choose their words 
carefully, telling them not to say ‘ra‘ina’, meaning 
Took after us’ or ‘shepherd us’, when addressing the Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him), because some of the Jews 
would mock what they said, twisting the words when addressing the Prophet (peace be upon him) themselves, corrupting 
its meaning to mean ‘foolish’ or ‘evil’. So, Allah told them not to use these words in order to prevent such mockery. He 
instructed them to say ‘unzuma’ instead, meaning ‘watch over us’, because the use of this word has no negative implica¬ 
tions. Without doubt, the disbelievers in Allah will have a painful torment. 

HI The disbelievers, whether they are from the People of the Scripture or from among the idolaters, do not like that Allah 
should send down any good thing, big or small, to you. Through His mercy Allah favours whom He wills of His servants 
with prophethood, revelation and faith. Allah’s bounty is vast. No one in creation gets any good except that it is from Him, 
and it is from His bounty that He sent His Prophet and revealed His scripture to us. 

Beneficial Points: 

1. Whoever knowingly turns away from guidance, Allah will make him follow what is false. 

2. Some of the Jews lack proper respect for the prophets of Allah, claiming that Solomon (peace be upon him) practised 
black magic; but Allah cleared Solomon of their false claim. 

3. Black magic is a reality and it affects the mind and the body. Those who practise it are disbelievers, and should face 
capital punishment. 

4. Nothing happens, be it good or evil, except that it is with Allah’s knowledge and with His permission. 

5. Faith and mindfulness of Allah are the best things anyone can store away for themselves for the next life. 

6. The objectives of the sacred law require the prohibition of anything that leads to harm. Therefore, any words or actions 
that might lead to corruption must be avoided. 

7. Grace is in Allah’s hands, and He favours whomever He wills with it through His mercy and wisdom. 



sjljJI oJyL 

\ *1 





£3 





























1 




&\?A\ 1 


Ip Allah makes it clear that whenever He removes 
the ruling of a verse or some words from the Qur’an, 
so that people forget them, He replaces them with 
something more beneficial for the immediate mo¬ 
ment or for later, or with what is similar. Such cases 
occur because of Allah’s wisdom and knowledge. 
You know, O Prophet, that Allah has power over all 
things. He does as He wills, and rules as He wishes. 
Ip You know, O Prophet, that everything in the 
heavens and the earth belongs to Allah, and that 

as 

He wills, and forbids them from doing what He 
wills, establishing the sacred law as He wishes, and 
abolishing what He wishes. Your only protector is 
Allah, Who will take care of you, and you have no 
other helper to protect you from harm. Allah is the 
protector and guardian of all, and has power over 
everything. 

(jf| O believers, it is not right for you to question 
your Prophet, resisting and quarrelling with the 
revelation as the people of Moses questioned their 
prophet before, like when they said, ‘Show us Allah 
openly’ [ Surah Al-Nisa’: 153]. Whoever exchang¬ 
es faith for disbelief has lost the balanced way, the 
right path. 

(Jf| Many of the People of the Scripture wish they 
could turn you back to worshipping idols as you 
did before you came to have faith because of envy, 
when it has become clear to them that what the 
Prophet came with is the truth from Allah. Forgive 
them what they do, and pardon them for their igno¬ 
rance and for whatever is not good in them, until 
the command of Allah comes regarding them. Al¬ 
lah’s command came with its ruling, either Islam, or paying the Jizya or physical intervention. Allah has power over all 
things, and they do not affect Him in any way. 

Ul Establish the prayer with all its parts, both obligatory and recommended aspects, and give Zakat from their wealth to 
those who deserve it. Whatever good action they do in life before death will be a treasure for them: the reward of which 
they will find with their Lord on the Day of Judgement. Allah sees all that you do, and rewards everyone accordingly. 
@) The Jews and the Christians each said that Paradise would be for them alone. These were just their vain wishes and 
imaginings. Tell them, O Prophet, in reply, to bring proof of what they were claiming if they were telling the truth. 

© All those who are sincere in repenting to Allah, doing good, serving Allah and following what the Prophet came with, 
will enter Paradise, no matter what group they come from. They will have their reward with their Lord. They will have no 
fear about what awaits them in the Afterlife, or feel sorrow about what passed them by in their lifetime. 

Regardless of someone’s original religious group - whether Jew, Christian, idolater other - successfully submitting to 
Allah is only now valid before Him by becoming Muslim, after the arrival of Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him). 
® Beneficial Points: 

1. Authority only belongs to Allah. He changes whatever He wills of His rulings and His sacred laws, and leaves those 
He wills as they are, in His wisdom and knowledge. 

2. Many of the People of the Scripture felt envy towards the Muslim nation because Allah favoured them with faith and 
with following the Messenger; and so they wished that they would return to disbelief, as they were before. 


| ^ | Ift 'V- 

5 l lj ot 

^ 9 M ^ j ■>^ ^ ^ ^ j ^ ^ ^ utavtus anu me eai m ueiungs iu .rviiaii, emu u 

Bjf* He rules as He wills. He instructs His servants 

< f ^ ■’"T *^ ^ a 

dr® ($) ^ 

0l 

~A1-Baqarah 1/' Parti 




















*UA 


^A-<_| J l^-j/J^ssjo (1^ 4J^ Jc^TL^-« ^8 

j^sj^^\j»-Si^ lA^ l)^=A* <^U)ji 

i3^1^\4A.<(j^^P>£)\3^- a_^j\ ij 9 ^)^rl^p.jJ^ 

o>3L_|U J j^&^tlj &\'&\\}% 


I : 


<uu 


J\sJ>5 


(jj| The Jews said that the Christians were not on 
the correct path and the Christians said the same 
about the Jews, although they both claimed to read 
the scriptures that Allah revealed to them, which 
contain the command to have faith in all the proph¬ 
ets without any distinction between them. In what 
they said, they are like those who know nothing, 
who worship others alongside Allah, rejecting all 
the prophets and the scriptures that were revealed 
to them. Allah will judge between those who disa¬ 
gree on the Day of Return. In His perfect and fair 
judgements, Allah tells His servants that there is no 
success without belief in all that He has revealed. 

@ No one does greater wrong than those who 
stop the name of Allah being said in His Houses 
of worship, preventing the prayer and remembrance 
of Allah and the recitation of the Qur’an in them, 
trying to destroy and ruin them, through tearing 
them down or stopping people from worshipping in 
them. Those who try to destroy them should not en¬ 
ter Allah’s places of worship, except fearfully and 
with trembling hearts, after their disbelief and hav¬ 
ing stopped people worshipping in them. They will 
have shame and humiliation in their life on earth 
at the hands of the believers, and in the Afterlife 
is a great torment for having stopped people from 
Allah’s Houses of worship. 

(j!J Allah has authority over the entire world, and 
He instructs His servants as He wills. Wherever you 
turn, you will find Allah: He surrounds His crea¬ 
tion. Whether He instructs you to face Jerusalem or 
the Kaaba, or you make a mistake in the direction 
of prayer or are not sure of it, then it is not an issue, 
because to Allah belongs every direction. Allah is vast in His blessings; He covers His creation with His mercy and ease. 
He knows their intentions and everything that they do. 

@ The Jews, the Christians and the idolaters, who worship others alongside Allah, said that Allah had taken a son. He is 
far above and beyond such a thing, because He has no need of His creation, and no one has a son unless he is needy; and 
to Allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth. All created beings are His servants, in submission to Him, 
glory be to Him! They are His servants and He deals with them as He wills. 

UJ Allah is the Creator of the heavens and the earth and all that is in them; and there is nothing in creation that is like 
Him. If He decrees and wills something, He only says to it ‘Be’ and it is as He willed it. Nothing can stop His command 
and His decree. 

@) Those without knowledge from among the People of the Scripture and the idolaters asked, in their stubbornness 
against the truth, why Allah did not speak to them directly, or why a miracle was not sent for them to see. Disbelieving 
communities said similar things to their prophets in the past: their hearts are all similar, because all disbelievers are the 
same, even if they are from different times and places. Allah makes His signs clear to those who are certain of the truth 
when it appears to them, not doubting or resisting it. 

@ The Prophet was sent with the religion of truth, in which there is no doubt: to bring the good news of Paradise to those 
who have faith, and to warn disbelievers about the fire of Hell. The Prophet only had to clearly deliver the message: Allah 
will not ask him about those people in the fire of Hell who did not believe in him. 

Beneficial Points: 

1. Disbelievers are all the same, even if they are from different races and places. They are alike in their disbelief, and in 
what they say about Allah without any knowledge. 

2. The ones who commit the greatest wrongs are those who prevent people from following the path of Allah and obstruct 
those who wish to do good. 

3. Allah is far too great to have a son or a spouse. Glory be to Him! He is not in need of His creation in any way. 





















S ^ ts&gz&sjf* 

&\yjLi i 


*Tj oL? Cjt «-W 

■" 




■> cT^2j Vra-*^. £) iPP a^ q\s ^ 

s^f 



|p Allah addresses and warns His Prophet, telling 
him that the Jews and the Christians will never be 
happy with him unless he leaves Islam and follows 
what they do; and that if he, or one of his follow¬ 
ers, were to do such a thing, after the clear truth 
has come to them, they would not find protection 
or help from Allah. 

This makes clear the seriousness of leaving the 
truth and of following people of falsehood. 

HJ The Qur’an mentions a group from the People 
of the Scripture who know the revealed texts they 
have been given and follow them properly. They 
find in these scriptures signs pointing to the truth 
of the Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him); 
and because of this they immediately have faith in 
him. Another group sticks to its disbelief, and for 
them is loss. 

(jl| O Israelites, remember the blessings, sacred and 
worldly, which I gave to you, and remember that I 
favoured you over those of your time with prophet- 
hood and authority. 

{j| Protect yourself from the torment of the Day of 
Return by following the instructions of Allah and 
keeping away from what He has prohibited, be¬ 
cause on that day no soul will be able to help an¬ 
other soul in any way; no ransom will be accepted 
for it, no matter how great; and no one pleading on 
its behalf will benefit it, no matter how high their 
position. On that day, a soul will have no helper 
other than Allah. 

|I| .The Qur’an tells us that Allah tested Abraham 
(peace be upon him) by instructing him to fulfil 
commandments and obligations. Abraham obeyed, 
fulfilling the orders completely. Allah told His prophet Abraham that He would make his manners and behaviour an 
example for people to follow. Abraham asked Allah to make also his descendants leaders who people would be guided 
by. Allah replied by saying that His promise to him of sacred leadership would not extend to the wrongdoers among his 
descendants. 

|fj) The Qur’an relates that Allah made the Kaaba a place for people to return to, as a means of connecting their hearts 
to Him. When they travel from it, they return to it. It has also been made a safe place for them where they will not be 
attacked. Allah tells people to make the stone which Abraham stood on while he was building the Kaaba into a place of 
prayer. Allah instructed Abraham and his son Ishmael to purify the sanctuary from filth and idols for those who wish to 
worship in it, go around the Kaaba, stay there for worship, praying and so on. 

|p Remember, O Prophet, when Abraham prayed to his Lord, asking Him to make Makkah a safe place, where no one 
would be faced with evil; and to provide the people who live there with all types of crops, and a special provision for 
those who have faith in Allah. Allah said that He would give some enjoyment to the disbelievers by giving them provision 
in this life; but in the next life they will be forced into the torment of the fire of Hell - a miserable place to which they 
return on the Day of Judgement. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Jews and Christians who read the Scripture properly know that what the Prophet (peace be upon him) came with is true 
guidance, and is from Allah. 

2. No matter what a Muslim does of good, the Jews and the Christians will not be pleased till they abandon Islam and 
follow them in their error. 

3. Leadership in faith is only given to those who are certain of the truth and are patient in carrying out Allah’s command¬ 
ments. 

4. The blessing of the prayer of Abraham (peace be upon him) for Makkah has meant that Allah made it a safe place for 
people and blessed those who live there with abundance. 


% Ij * ($) 

JlS <£&•* J^ 

j iirJa \S j 

Al-Baqarah 19 





















@ Remember, O Prophet, when Abraham and Ish- 
mael were raising the foundations of the Kaaba. As 
they did so, they asked with humility for Allah to 
accept all they did, including building the Kaaba. 

Allah hears what we say and knows our intentions 
and everything that we do. 

(j|| They asked Allah to make them surrender in 
devotion to His command, humble towards Him, 
not worshipping anyone besides Him; and to make 
their children and their descendants a nation who 
also surrendered in devotion to Him. They also 
asked Allah to teach them how to worship Him, to 
forgive them for their faults and shortcomings in 
doing what He instructed them. He turns to those 
who ask for forgiveness and is compassionate to¬ 
wards His creation. 

Ip They asked Allah to send a messenger to their 
offspring from the descendants of Ishmael, to recite 
the revealed verses of Allah to them and teach them 
the Qur’an and the Sunnah, and to purify them from 
worshipping others alongside Allah and from all 
evil. He is the Mighty in His essence, and the Wise 
in what He does and in His decrees. 

(jf| No one turns away from the religion of Abra¬ 
ham, peace be upon him, to other ways of life ex¬ 
cept those who do not know their own worth, and 
are content with humiliation. Allah chose him as a 
messenger in this world and as a friend of Allah, 
and in the Hereafter he will be one of the righteous 
people who fulfilled what Allah required them to 
do, and so reached the highest levels. 

@) Allah chose Abraham because of his swiftness 
in surrendering, telling him to be faithful and de¬ 
voted to Him in worship and to humbly do as He instructed. Abraham replied to his Lord saying that he had surrendered 
in devotion to Him, Who created His servants, providing for them and taking care of their affairs. 

HI Abraham advised his sons to also say, T have surrendered to the Lord of people’; and Jacob told his sons to do the 
same. They told their sons that Allah had chosen for them the religion of surrendering in devotion, Islam, and to hold on 
to it tightly until they died, surrendering sincerely to Allah on the inside and the outside. 

HI Were you present at the time of Jacob’s death, when he asked his sons what they would worship after he had died? 
They replied to him, saying that they would worship Allah, the Lord of his forefathers - Abraham, Ishmael and Isaac - 
namely, the One Allah without partners; and they said that they surrendered in devotion to Him alone and were bound 
to Him. 

HI That nation has passed away like other communities. They gained whatever they did in their lives, earning either good 
or evil; and you will gain what you have earned. You will not be asked about what they did, and they will not be asked 
about what you do. No one is held to account for the disobedience of another, but everyone is rewarded according to their 
own actions. You should not be distracted from paying attention to your own behaviour by looking at what those before 
you did. Nothing will benefit anyone except his own good actions. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The mindful believer is not dazzled by his own good actions, but worries that they might not be accepted from him by 
Allah. For this reason, the believer should often ask Allah to accept his good actions. 

2. The blessing of the prayer of the father of the prophets, Abraham (peace be upon him), meant that Allah accepted his 
prayer, and made the seal of His prophets (Muhammad, peace and blessings be upon him) from the people of Makkah. 

3. The verses show the correctness of asking Allah to accept our prayers through His divine names and attributes, and not 
through the innovation of intermediaries, such as by the right or position of someone else. 

4. The religion of Abraham is the true faith, which is the natural way of life for us. Only a fool who goes against his own 
nature rejects it. 

5. It is valid to instruct children to follow guidance, and make them promise to hold tightly to the truth. 


\2j (\£) 

\j> l \L £ 1 I 

| ho I 

AjJ 9^ 1 \\$ \ \t % 3Ajlq j 

[ 



















y \ 








A f 




(jp The Jews told the Muslims that they would 
have to be Jews if they were to be rightly guided; 
and the Christians told them that they would have 
to be Christians if they were to be rightly-guided. 
Tell them, O Prophet, in answer, that you follow the 
religion of Abraham, who turned away from other 
false ways of life to the way of truth. He did not 
worship others next to Allah, as some do. 

(jp Tell the Jews and Christians who make these 
baseless claims that you have faith in Allah and 
the Qur’an which He revealed to you, and in what 
He revealed to Abraham and his sons Ishmael and 
Isaac, and to Jacob, and in what He revealed to the 
prophets from the descendants of Jacob. Say that 
you have faith in the Torah which Allah gave to 
Moses, and the Gospel which He gave to Jesus, and 
in all the scriptures that He gave to every one of the 
prophets, with no distinction between them, having 
faith in all of them, not only having faith in some 
and rejecting others. Tell them that you humbly sur¬ 
render to Him alone. 

@ If the Jews and the Christians, and other disbe¬ 
lievers, have faith in the same way that you do, then 
they have been guided to the right way of life which 
Allah is satisfied with. Yet if they turn away from 
faith because they reject all the prophets or some of 
them, then they are in disagreement and are against 
you. Do not be sad, O Prophet, because Allah will 
protect you from their harm and evil, and give you 
victory over them. Allah hears all that they say, and 
knows all their intentions and actions. 

(jp Hold tightly to the religion of Allah which is 
the natural way of life for you, on the inside and 
outside. There is no better way of life than the path of Allah, which agrees with our nature, benefiting us in every way and 
protecting us from evil and corruption. Say that you worship Allah alone and do not worship anything apart from Him. 
(jp If the People of the Scripture argue with you, saying they have more right to Allah and His religion than you do be¬ 
cause their way of life is older and their scriptures came before yours, then it will not benefit them. Allah is the Lord of 
everyone, and He is not for them alone. Tell them, O Prophet, that you have your actions which they will not be asked 
about; and they have their actions which you will not be asked about. Everyone will be rewarded according to what they 
have done. Tell them that you are sincere to Allah in your worship and in doing as He instructs you, and that you do not 
worship anything apart from Him. 

|f| Or do you say, O People of the Scripture, that Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob and the prophets from Jacob’s descend¬ 
ants were on the path of the Jews or Christians? Ask, O Prophet, in reply to them, whether they are more knowledgeable 
or is Allah. If they claim that they were Jews or Christians, then what they say is false, because they were sent and died 
before the Torah and the Gospel were revealed. This shows that what they say is a lie against Allah and His Prophet, and 
that they hid the truth of what was revealed to them. No one does greater wrong than someone who hides firm evidence 
that they have from Allah, as some of the People of the Scripture did. Allah is not unaware of what you do, and you will 
be rewarded accordingly. 

@) That nation passed away before you, and earned what they earned from what they did. They have earned for them¬ 
selves from their own actions; and you have earned from your own actions. You will not be asked about what they did, 
and they will not be asked about what you do. No one is held accountable for the disobedience of someone else, and no 
one benefits from what someone else does. Each person will receive his reward, according to what they themselves do. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The claim of the People of the Scripture that they follow the truth will not benefit them if they disbelieve in what Allah 
revealed to His Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him). 

2. Faith in the scriptures which Allah revealed and in the prophets He sent to people is obligatory. 

3. Recognition of Allah’s Lordship is natural to all of His creation. His creation is only led away from this by Satan and 
his helpers. 


J J 

>i==u3j 5454*5 js0 

05 ^54^ 4=44 

JUi4U 3 v; | 

515^5 4444^ 5i;05 j 






















^ 'J’ ^ ^ ^ ^ _ y TL 

~^jy& (^\_c-Ljl^ {j* l£A^-2 t3jJzd\ 4, J^^jS 

l^u^S'&lj^l: 

l^Xw^J^^==Cl£> 0 f^4J 

4 A^£tS? ^ VISL^- 

oilQp^;il^|j ^^=ois 

d^li^J^tli^^J ^ISj l£P JS (£)> 


U-rS>^-3J< 


-UJlJ 



(jj^d 


OySjd C£^=& \yj\ i?% 

j ‘~.£-‘z==$ [ C*jS\ ^j^C)j^LJc\^^j^Ju 


@ The foolish and weak-minded among the Jews, 
and those like them from among the hypocrites, will 
ask what turned the Muslims away from the prayer 
direction of Jerusalem, which was their direction of 
prayer before. Tell them, O Prophet, in reply, that 
to Allah belongs the east and the west and every 
direction, and He directs whomever He wills of His 
servants to whatever direction He wills. He guides 
whom He wills of His servants to the right path 
which is free of distortions and misguidance. 

(Jfl Just as I made a direction of prayer for you, I 
have chosen you to be a good, just and balanced 
nation from among all the communities: in your be¬ 
liefs and your ways of worship and in your transac¬ 
tions, so that you will be witnesses for the prophets 
of Allah on the Day of Judgement, confirming that 
they delivered the messages Allah instructed them 
to deliver to their people; and so that the Prophet 
Muhammad (peace be upon him) will also witness 
that he delivered his message to you. 

Allah changed the direction of prayer that you used 
to face (Jerusalem) to demonstrate who was con¬ 
tent with Allah’s decree, willingly doing as He in¬ 
structed and following the Messenger; and to also 
demonstrate who turned away from his religion, 
following his own desires and not obeying Allah’s 
sacred law. The first change of prayer direction was 
difficult, except for those who Allah granted faith 
to and who were certain that whatever He decrees 
for His servants has far reaching wisdom and un¬ 
derlying reasons behind it. Allah will not make you 
lose your faith in Him, or your good actions, in¬ 
cluding the prayers you prayed before the change 
of prayer direction. Allah is kind and compassionate with people, not overburdening them, and they will not lose the 
reward for their actions. 

HI Allah saw you, O Prophet, turning your face and gazing towards the heavens, anticipating revelation about changing 
the direction of prayer to the place you loved. Allah will turn you to a prayer direction which you will be pleased with, to 
the Sacred House of Allah, instead of the prayer direction you now face, so turn your face to the Sacred House of Allah 
in Makkah, and wherever you are, O believers, turn towards it to perform your prayers. Those who have been given 
the Scripture, the Jews and the Christians, know well that the change of prayer direction is the truth revealed from their 
Creator Who arranges and manages their lives, as it is clear in their Scripture. Allah is not unaware of what those who 
turn away from the truth do. He, glory be to Him, is aware of everything, and will reward them according to their actions. 
HI By Allah! If you provided the Jews and Christians who have been given the Scripture with every sign and proof 
that the change of prayer direction was the truth, they would not face your prayer direction, stubborn against what you 
say and too proud to follow the truth. You will not face their prayer direction after Allah has directed you away from it, 
and they will not face the prayer directions of one another, because each group calls the other disbelievers, and because 
they follow their desires in the matter of the prayer direction and in other sacred laws and rulings, even after the true 
knowledge which was revealed to you and about which there is no doubt. If you were to leave guidance, and follow their 
desires, you would certainly be of the wrongdoers. Here Allah addresses the Prophet(s) directly to show how wrong it 
would be to follow them. Of course, Allah has protected the prophet himself from ever doing so, and this as a warning 
for his followers after him. 

® Beneficial Points : 

1. Turning away from the sacred law of Allah and ignoring its importance is a sign of foolishness and weak-minded¬ 
ness. 2. The verses teach the virtue and honour given to this nation, since Allah praised them and described them as the 
moderate and just nation among all others. 3. The believers are warned against following the wishes of the People of the 
Scripture, because they knowingly turned away from the truth. 4. There was a possibility during the period of revelation 
that certain sacred laws might be replaced by others, as the direction of prayer was changed from Jerusalem to the Sacred 
Mosque in Makkah. 






















<^fyw)0^oUo ^Jtj £>S\dj 

j &\| 

<iijJ &^~3 4^ 

1 4i 4J 





^4; 


1 ; 


\£0C)j 


*) 


(jf| The scholars of the Jews and the Christians to 
whom Allah gave the scripture recognise Muham¬ 
mad (peace be upon him) as completely as they 
recognise their own children and distinguish them 
from others. Nevertheless, a group of them hide the 
truth that has come to them, out of envy, fully aware 
that it is the truth. 

HJ This is the truth from your Lord, so make abso¬ 
lutely certain, O Messenger, that you are not one of 
those who doubt its truth. 

|f| Every nation has a direction they turn to, wheth¬ 
er physically or spiritually. For this reason, there 
is a difference between them in their directions of 
prayer and in their sacred laws. There is nothing 
wrong with them facing different directions if it is 
by Allah’s command and law, so try to outdo each 
other, O believers, in doing the good actions that 
you have been instructed to do. Allah will bring you 
together from wherever you may be on the Day of 
Judgement, to reward you according to what you 
have done. Allah has power over all things. It is not 
difficult for Him to bring you all together and re¬ 
ward you. 


^ ' \\ ^ \^<C\^ ^<> © Wherever you come from and wherever you are, 

j uILj HP y 0 u, q p ro phet, and your followers are to face to- 






*>J\ 


Al-Baqarah 


Part 2 


wards the Sacred Mosque (the Kaaba in Makkah) 
when you want to pray. It is the truth that has been 
revealed to you from your Lord. Allah is not una¬ 
ware of what you do. Rather, He is aware of all that 
you do, and you will be rewarded accordingly. 

|f| Wherever you come from, O Prophet, when you 
want to pray, turn towards the direction of the Sa¬ 
cred Mosque; and wherever you may be, O believ¬ 


ers, turn your face towards it if you want to pray, so that the people will have no argument against you, except those of 
them who are wrongdoers. They will remain in their stubbornness, arguing against you with the weakest of arguments. 
Do not fear them, but fear your Lord alone, following His instructions and keeping away from what He has prohibited. 
Allah instructed you to face the Kaaba to perfect His blessings upon you, distinguishing you from all other communities 
and guiding you to the noblest direction of prayer. 

(Sj| Allah blessed you in another way: sending a messenger to you from among you, who recites His verses, purifying 
you by directing you to virtue and goodness and forbidding you from evil and wrong, teaching you the Qur’an and the 
Sunnah, and teaching you worldly and sacred knowledge which you did not know. 

(jf| So, remember Allah with your hearts and your whole beings, and He will remember you with approval and protection, 
for you are rewarded according to what you do. Also, be grateful to Allah for the blessings He has given you, and do not 
be ungrateful by denying them or using them in prohibited ways. 

|1| O you who have faith in Allah and follow His Messenger, ask for help from Allah in everything, through the beauty of 
patience and by establishing the prayer in the way Allah has instructed. Allah is truly with those who are patient, giving 
them success and helping them. 

® Beneficial Points : 

1. Believers are to leave disagreements and busy themselves with doing what Allah has instructed them, rushing towards 
Allah, which is better for the believers with their Lord on the Day of Judgement. 

2. There are many good actions that bring us closer to Allah, so the believer can choose what they like from them, and 
those that are appropriate for them, when they have a choice in the sacred law. 

3. Asking Allah for help with patience and prayer are the ways people receive the most help in worldly and sacred matters. 


















j 0O^^^4S? oyS^lU^Sl S? 

^ ^ is -"" "”* " i 

^jA^j 3} \j ^-^^>-4^3 ($) | 

drS- Vj^>^ 23 \ oi.' Yc tej 

£)\ CU>^ ^ £^~Cr*^ jilt 


(jp Do not say, O believers, about those who are 
killed whilst striving in Allah’s path that they are 
dead just as others are; rather, they are alive with 
their Lord, but you do not realise that they are liv¬ 
ing, because the way in which they are alive can 
only be understood through revelation from Allah. 

IP Allah will test people with different types of 
hardships: some with fear of those who are against 
them; hunger because of lack of food; lack of mon¬ 
ey because of losing it or difficulty gaining it; loss 
of lives due to death from diseases and tragedies 
that kill people, or being martyred for the sake of 
Allah; and a lack of resources from the earth. Give 
good news, O Prophet, to those who are patient in 
the face of these hardships, of what will make them 
happy in this world and in the Afterlife. 

IP The patient are those who, when they are struck 
by one of these hardships, say, in acceptance, that 
all power belongs to Allah, He deals with us as 
He wills, and we will return to Him on the Day of 
Judgement, and it is He Who created us and show¬ 
ers us with many blessings; so, to Him is our return 
and our end. 

HI Those who possess these virtues are praised by 
Allah in the highest gathering of angels, and mercy 
descends on them. They are the ones guided to the 
path of truth. 

|p The two mountains known as Safa and Marwah, 
near to the Kaaba, are landmarks of the clear sacred 
law. Whoever goes to the Kaaba to perform the acts 
of Hajj or Umrah, there is no fault in them walking 
between the two mountains. 

By clarifying that there was no fault in this action, 

Allah was comforting those Muslims who avoided walking between the mountains because they feared it was an unac¬ 
ceptable action from the time of ignorance before Islam; but Allah made it clear that the walking between the mountains 
was an acceptable act of Hajj. 

Whoever sincerely does what is recommended of voluntary sacred acts, Allah acknowledges them and rewards them. He 
is aware of who does good and is worthy of being rewarded. 

|p Those Jews and Christians who hide the clear proofs which Allah revealed showing the truth of the Prophet and what 
he brought, after Allah had made it clear to the people in their scriptures, Allah removes them from His mercy; and all the 
angels, the prophets and people call for them to be removed from His mercy. 

|p The exception is those who repent to Allah, asking for forgiveness, and regretting having hidden these clear signs, 
correcting what they do outwardly and inwardly, and making clear the truth and guidance which they had hidden. Allah 
accepts their repentance to Him. He turns to those who turn to Him, asking for forgiveness and regretting what they have 
done, and He forgives and is compassionate with them. 

|p Those who disbelieve and die in disbelief, not having repented, they are condemned by Allah by being removed from 
His mercy; and the angels and people all call for them to be removed and excluded from Allah’s mercy. 

IP They will always be condemned, and their punishment will not be lightened, not even for a day; and they will not be 
given any extra time on the Day of Judgement. 

IP O people, your Allah is the true Allah, the One, unique in His essence and attributes. There is no other true Allah, and 
He is the Merciful and His mercy is vast. He is Compassionate with His creation, surrounding them with many blessings. 

Beneficial Points : 

1. Allah’s custom is to test people: He promises to greatly reward those who are patient with the tests and to give them 
the noblest ranks. 

2. One of the worst wrongs, with the severest punishment, is hiding the truth which Allah has revealed and deceiving 
people and leading them away from the guidance that the prophets brought. 

3. The verses establish the validity of walking between Safa and Marwah for whoever goes to the Kaaba on Hajj or 
Umrah. 


\y\-3 \ Si ^0 

0 




Al-Baqarah 


Part 2 

















Yo 




^ 15 Jl i \ cj.6^ 

l^dc^jjL^Jy 1 -Co^^Vi^silL-. ^Cyt 

<j*l5J^5^0v^^ gJd^tf 

oi^\j ^ ^ Oj ^ <j^ J^cix> <j^ 

sr^xlS^^T c^iSs v^\x 

(^<y\ A^\ioXju 4J^\ olS^Hr^^' \$\c\ CJ\'X^\ 
^\^\\^ \ 
*|jj| (J^j 


(jp The following are clear signs of the Oneness of 
Allah, glory be to Him, for those who understand 
the evidence and proof: the creation of the heavens 
and the earth, and the wonders in them; the suc¬ 
cession of night and day; the passing of life and 
death; happiness and sorrow; wealth and poverty; 
ships that sail through the waters of the sea, car¬ 
rying food, clothing, trade and other things that 
people need and which benefit them; water that 
Allah sends down, bringing the earth to life with 
the agriculture and pasture that grows in it, and the 
living creatures He spreads out in it; the changing 
of the winds from one direction to another; and the 
clouds, controlled between the sky and the earth. 

Even with these clear signs, there are people 
who take others besides Allah as their Allahs, con¬ 
sidering them equal to Him, and loving them as 
they love Allah. Those who have real faith love Al¬ 
lah more than those others love their Allahs: they 
do not worship anyone besides Him; and they love 
Him in hardship and in ease, while those others 
only love their Allahs when things are going well 
- when things go badly, they call on Allah alone. 
If the wrongdoers could see with their own eyes the 
punishment that waits in the Afterlife for those who 
worship others with Allah and commit sins, then 
they would know that all power belongs to Allah 
alone and that He is firm in punishing those who 
stubbornly rebel. If they saw this, then they would 
not worship anyone with Allah. 

{jp Then the leaders who were followed in disbelief 
will reject the weak people who followed them be¬ 
cause of seeing the terrors and hardships of the Day 
of Judgement; so, all ties and means of escape will be cut off from them. 

IP The weak and those who followed will say, ‘If only we could go back to the earth, we would reject our leaders as 
they reject us’. Allah shows them the severe punishment in the Afterlife and the consequence of following their leaders 
in falsehood: regrets and sorrow, and they will never leave the fire of Hell. 

|p O people, eat from the meat, vegetables and fruits of the earth which are lawful and good, and not harmful. Do not 
follow the actions of Satan and his evil whisperings: he is a clear enemy who is hostile to you - anyone with sense would 
not follow an enemy who wants to harm and mislead them. 

|p Satan only commands harmful, evil actions and disobedience that will bring hardship, as well as for you to say things 
about faith in Allah and His sacred laws that have not been given to you by Allah or His Prophet. 

® Beneficial Points : 

1. Allah has created things and signs which show how amazing He is, highlight His power, and that He alone is worthy 
of being worshipped. Only those who reflect understand this. 

2. Those who really have faith in Allah love Him more than the rest of creation, because they are devoted to Him in hard¬ 
ship and in ease, and do not worship anyone besides Him. 

3. On the Day of Judgement, all connections between people will be broken, friends will leave one another and everyone 
will stand alone, except the relationships that were only for the sake of Allah. 

4. There is no excuse for those who followed their leaders into misguidance, not using their own intellects, and going 
against their own nature. 

5. The verses show the great favour of Allah to His creation, putting everything on earth at their disposal, and making it 
lawful and good. 




















sjlLIisJ 


jtSiyiu 


J o^-A-*i^JL*)\ jW oU=^J\ lifrljW ^iAc. 





|p If these disbelievers are told to follow the guid¬ 
ance and light which Allah revealed, they say, re¬ 
sisting stubbornly, that they will follow the beliefs 
and customs that their fathers followed. Do they 
follow their fathers even though they understood 
nothing of guidance or the light, and were not guid¬ 
ed to the truth that Allah accepts? 

@ The example of those who disbelieve and stub¬ 
bornly follow the path of their fathers is like the 
example of the shepherd who shouts, calling to his 
animals that hear his voice, but do not understand 
what he says. They are deaf to hearing the truth so 
that it will benefit them, dumb as they are unable 
to speak about the truth, and blind to seeing it, and 
because of this they do not understand the guidance 
which you call them to. 

@ O you who have faith in Allah and follow His 
Messenger, consume the good things that Allah has 
provided and allowed for you; and be thankful to 
Allah, outwardly and inwardly, for the overwhelm¬ 
ing blessings He has given you. Part of being thank¬ 
ful to Him is acting with complete devotion to Him 
and not going against Him, if you truly worship 
Him alone, and do not worship anything besides 
Him. 

(j|| Allah has only forbidden you from consuming 
that which died without being sacrificed according 
to the sacred law and having its blood flow, the 
meat of pigs and what has had other than Allah’s 
name mentioned over it when it was sacrificed. Yet 
if someone is forced to eat something of these for¬ 
bidden types, and does not sin by eating it when 
they are not in need, nor do they go beyond the lim¬ 
it of what is necessary, then they have done no wrong and will receive no punishment. Allah is Forgiving and Compas¬ 
sionate to whomever repents to Him; and it is from His mercy that He overlooks the eating of forbidden things when it 
is necessary. 

jf!| Those who hide what Allah revealed in the scriptures and the signs of the truth and prophethood of Muhammad (peace 
be upon him) - as the Jews and Christians did, getting something small in return for what they hide, such as leadership, 
status or money - they only fill their stomachs with that which will cause them to suffer in the fire of Hell. Then on the 
Day of Judgement, Allah will not speak to them with words that make them joyful; but they will only hear that which 
makes them sad: they will not be praised, and they will have a painful punishment. 

|j| Those who hide knowledge exchange guidance for misguidance, as they hid the truth, and exchange the forgiveness 
of Allah for His punishment. How determined they are to do things that will lead them into the fire of Hell, as if they do 
not realize what suffering it contains! 

HI That punishment is what they get for hiding knowledge and guidance, because Allah revealed the sacred scriptures in 
truth, which must be made clear and not hidden. 

Also, those who disagree with the sacred scripture, believing some of it and hiding some of it, have taken a position that 
is far from the truth. 

® Beneficial Points : 

1. People often go the wrong way because they do not use their reason, and follow whoever came before them in their 
error, copying them blindly without thinking. 

2. If someone does not benefit from the blessings Allah has given them - in terms of their mind, hearing and sight - then 
it makes them like those who have lost these blessings. 

3. Some of those with the severest punishment on the Day of Judgement are those who hide the knowledge that Allah 
revealed and the guidance that His messengers came with. 

4. It is from Allah’s blessings for His faithful servants that He only made a few things prohibited and made what is al¬ 
lowed vast. 




0) i3ULL fjk OfcJ 


| Al-Baqarah 

26 


Part 2 | 


























YV 


citSlgy | 




3 ^ 1 ? 3 /®^ J 13 ^ 3 ^^ < 3 ^^ 3 

^aL3\j <^U&^\(3j L^i? 

±2. ^ ^ X ^ ''** > 

Cjy^j 

^ t j^\^Yc. Zfj$\ W^^($) Vj^ ^3l)!5 | 




**\k^ ^ **. 


-* 

>*•*, 


@ Doing good that pleases Allah does not just mean 
turning towards the east or the west or disputing 
about that. Rather, it is having faith in Allah as the 
only Allah, the Day of Judgement, all of the angels, 
all of the revealed scriptures and all of the proph¬ 
ets, without distinguishing between them; charita¬ 
ble spending, despite loving and valuing wealth, to 
relatives, orphans, the poor, the stranger who is cut 
off from his family and homeland because of a jour¬ 
ney, and whoever has a need that makes it necessary 
for them to ask people for help; giving money to 
free slaves from captivity; establishing the prayer as 
Allah instructed; giving Zakat; being true to prom¬ 
ises; and patience in poverty, hardship, illness and 
in times of conflict without fleeing. Such people are 
those who are true to Allah in their faith and in what 
they do. They are the Mindful who follow what Al¬ 
lah has instructed them to do, and who stay away 
from what Allah has prohibited. 

(j|| O you who have faith in Allah and follow His 
Messenger, it is decreed for you that in cases where 
someone deliberately attacks and kills someone, the 
punishment for the murderer should be the same as 
their crime: the freeman killed for the freeman; the 
slave for the slave; and the female for the female. If 
the person killed had forgiven before his death, or 
his guardian has forgiven in return for the payment 
of blood money (a sum of money paid by the mur¬ 
derer in return for being pardoned), then the per¬ 
son who forgives should ask for the sum of money 
fairly, and not follow that up with insult or injury, 
and the murderer should pay the sum of money in a 
good way, without hesitation or delay. In allowing 
this forgiveness and the payment of the blood money your Lord makes things easier for you, and this is a mercy for the 
Muslim nation. Whoever attacks the murderer after his pardon and the acceptance of the blood money will receive a 
painful punishment from Allah. 

(jf| In the law of equivalent punishment decreed by Allah there is life for you, because it spares your blood, stopping 
further attacks between you. Those with sense understand this: who are mindful of Allah, keeping to His sacred law and 
doing as He instructs. 

(j§| It has been decreed for you that if one of you is about to die, and they are leaving a large amount of wealth behind, 
then they should make a will for their parents and close relatives, according to the sacred laws, not exceeding one third of 
the wealth (the rest of the wealth being distributed according to the laws of inheritance). Making this will is a firm duty 
on those who are mindful of Allah. 

This ruling was revealed before the verses about inheritance. When the verses about inheritance were revealed it was 
made clear who should inherit from the person who has died and how much they should inherit. 

|I| Whoever then changes the will, adding to it or taking away from it or stopping something when they know what the 
will contains, the sin of it will be upon those who changed it, and the person who wrote the will is not held responsible 
for what they did. Allah hears all that His creation say, and knows all that they do; and He knows every detail of the 
situations they are in. 

® Beneficial Points : 

1. The devotion that Allah loves lies in the completion of faith and doing good actions; but outward obedience alone is 
not enough. 

2. The practice of the law of equivalent punishment, which Allah decreed for you in matters of life and other things, is 
one of the greatest way to save lives and stop transgression and oppression. 

3. The verses demonstrate the importance of the will, especially for those who have something to leave to their relatives, 
and highlights the sin of anyone changing the will of someone who has died. 


J } 

j 1 3 sfc t Vj$0_j>\ifj\Ac- 3 a\^ liAVi -V*> 

Xa _Go 

AjaJ XX. Oiij \ (Jpj XX 




Al-Baqarah pg ' 


27 


Part 2 























J* — 5 ^ ^xl^gls taSk^ ^ fl ^ 5 !“(_>^> a ij^<J 

C~$L* VXvS>;^ ajS^L> 1 <& 

j* . '' =i\ Z& cxt^L^,^ t^P <_~^\-»^=^^=cAc- 
<jft£j-*^j£^ cJt '^iy‘j^==^~i- 

{j\£==z^o*?f\jb Z^Sdj&yL ^ a) ,yj& \ 

(j^llii c^ -\_& j\ L^lV>-L c£ 3 \ r ^LLa^_ ^-4^ 0 j 



v 13^=^, Ld |!j^ 

La ^_pLL \jLj^= ==== *^Aj ® A—*J \ ^L-J= 



AJfc 


(jp Whoever knows that there is an error in judge¬ 
ment from the person who made the will, or that 
there is some injustice in it, and advises the person 
and rectifies the wrong, and reconciles between 
those who are in disagreement about it, then there 
is no blame on them; rather they are rewarded for 
putting things right. Allah is Forgiving towards 
whomever of His servants repents to Him, and is 
Compassionate with them. 

(jf| O you who have faith in Allah and follow His 
Prophet, Allah has ordered you to fast, as He or¬ 
dered those before you, so that you may become 
mindful of Allah, protecting yourself from His pun¬ 
ishment by doing good actions - fasting being one 
of the best of these. 

(jl| You are ordered to fast for a small number of 
days in the year. Yet whoever of you is ill, with an 
illness that makes fasting difficult, or travelling, 
then they do not need to fast; but they can make up 
for these days by fasting the same number of other 
days. Those who are able to fast, but do not, should 
compensate by feeding a poor person for every day 
they did not fast. Fasting is better for you than not 
fasting and feeding a poor person instead, if you 
only knew what goodness there is in fasting. 

This was the first of Allah’s laws about fasting: 
whoever wanted to fast did so; and whoever did not 
want to fast was permitted not to, and fed a poor 
person instead. Afterwards Allah made fasting a 
duty for every able person who has reached puberty. 

HI The Qur’an was first revealed to the Prophet 
Muhammad (peace be upon him) on the Night of 
Decree in the month of Ramadan. Allah revealed it 
as a guidance for people, with clear proofs of its guidance, and the criterion between the truth and falsehood. Whoever 
reaches the month of Ramadan, and is well and healthy, is required to fast; and whoever is ill, or for whom fasting is 
difficult, or is travelling, then they may break their fast. If they do not fast then they must perform make-up fasts for the 
days they missed at another time. 

Allah intends ease, and not hardship, in what He decrees for you; and wants you to complete the right number of days 
and to glorify Him upon the completion of Ramadan, on the day of Eid, as He helped you and made it possible for you to 
fast, so that you thank Allah for guiding you to this religion which He has approved for you. 

(jl| If they ask you, O Prophet, about how close Allah is and about His answering of prayers, Allah is close to them and 
knows everything about them. He hears their prayer, and they do not need intennediaries or to raise their voices. Allah 
responds to the call of whoever calls Him sincerely, praying to Him; so, let them be devoted to Him and His sacred 
law, firm in their faith, as that is the best route to Allah’s response - perhaps in that way they might be rightly guided in 
worldly and sacred matters. 

® Beneficial Points : 

1. Allah made fasting obligatory on Muslims and on people who came before them, because it brings about mindfulness 
of Allah, and helps sustain it. 

2. Allah distinguished the month of Ramadan by revealing the Qur’an in it. It is the month of the Qur’an, which is why 
the Prophet (peace be upon him) would study it with Gabriel during Ramadan. 

3. The sacred law of Islam is based, in its principles and practice, on making things easy and removing difficulty. Allah 
has not, therefore, made things difficult for us in following this way of life. 

4. The verses instruct the believers to glorify Allah by chanting the takblr on the night and day of the Eid, thanking Allah 
for His blessings and recognizing His gifts. 

5. The verses remind the believers of the closeness of Allah to His servants, and that He surrounds them, knowing 
everything about them, and that He listens to their prayers and responds to them. 




Al-Baqarah 


28 


Part 2 
























Jfp At first it was not allowed for a man, if he had 
gone to sleep on the night of the fast and then woke 
up before dawn, to eat or drink, or approach his 
wife. Allah replaced this ruling, allowing you, O 
believers, to have relations with your wives during 
the nights of fasting. They are a protection for you, 
keeping you pure, and you are a cover for them, 
keeping them pure. You both need each other. Allah 
knew that you were betraying yourselves by doing 
what you were not allowed to, so He had mercy 
on you, turning to you when you asked for forgive¬ 
ness, and made things easier for you. So, have re¬ 
lations with them, and seek the children Allah has 
decreed you, and eat and drink during the whole of 
the night, until the break of true dawn is clear to 
you. Then complete your fast, not consuming any¬ 
thing from the break of dawn until sunset. But do 
not have relations with your wives when you are in 
spiritual retreat in the mosques, because that inval¬ 
idates the retreat. 

These laws are the limits of Allah: between what 
is allowed and what is forbidden- so do not go 
near them. Whoever goes near the limits of Allah 
is close to falling into what is prohibited. By clearly 
setting out such laws, Allah makes His signs obvi¬ 
ous to people so that they may be mindful of Him, 
and do what He instructs and leave what He has 
prohibited. 

(j§| Do not take each other’s wealth unjustly: rob¬ 
bing it or taking it by force or by cheating, and then 
making it a legal dispute in order to obtain other’s 
wealth wrongfully, when you know that Allah has 
prohibited that. Committing a sin knowingly is the 


worst of things and has the greatest of punishments. 

(jf| They ask you, O Messenger, about the formation of the new moons and their changing states. Tell them in reply about 
the wisdom behind them: that they measure time for people, so that they know when to do their acts of worship, such as 
the months of Hajj and fasting, and the completion of the year for Zakat; they also fix the time frames of transactions, 
such as the deadlines for paying blood money or debts. 

It is not righteousness or goodness that you come to houses from the rear wearing your ihram for Hajj or Umrah, as they 
used to claim during the time of ignorance before Islam. Rather, true righteousness is the righteousness of whoever is 
mindful, outwardly and inwardly. So, enter houses from their correct doors, because it is easier for you and less trouble¬ 
some. Allah does not overburden you with difficulty, so protect yourself from the punishment of Allah by doing good, in 
order that you may be successful in achieving what you wish for, and in escaping from what you fear. 

HI Fight in order to raise the word of Allah, against those of the disbelievers who fight you to turn you away from the 
religion of Allah; but do not overstep the limits of Allah by killing children, women, the elderly, or by mutilating the dead 
and so on. Allah does not love those who overstep the limits He has established and made sacred. 

® Beneficial Points : 

1. The rulings of the sacred law are based on making things easier and less troubling, because Allah understands the 
weakness of His servants. 

2. The legislation of i’tikaf- staying in spiritual retreat in the mosque for worship - involves not doing anything that goes 
against the aims of i’tikaf, including being affectionate with women. 

3. The verses demonstrate the prohibition of taking the wealth of others unjustly, and of using any ways that achieve this, 
including bribery. 

4. True righteousness and mindfulness is through following the sacred law and honouring its limits. 

5. Injustice or overstepping the limits is prohibited, because the religion of Islam is based on justice and kindness. 






















I o 




(Jp And kill them where you come across them, and 
make them leave the place they made you leave - 
which is Makkah. And oppression that stops those 
who believe from worshipping, making them return 
to disbelief and ungratefulness is worse than killing. 

And do not fight with them in the Sacred Mosque, out 
of respect for it, unless they start fighting you there. 

If they start fighting in the Sacred Mosque, then kill 
them. And fighting them if they attack in the Sacred 
mosque is the reward of those who deny the truth. (jl| 

If these aggressive disbelievers stop fighting you and 
stop disbelieving, then stop fighting them. Allah For¬ 
giving to whomever repents to Him with regret, asking 
for forgiveness, and does not hold them to account for 
the disobedience they did before. He is Compassionate 
with them and not quick to punish. (|||) Fight the dis¬ 
believers until they do not prevent people from Allah’s 
path and there is no disbelief, and until the dominant 
way of life is the path of Allah. But if they stop their 
disbelief and stop preventing others from the path of 
Allah, then stop fighting them. There is to be no ag¬ 
gression except against those who oppress, through 
disbelief and by preventing people from the path of 
Allah. (@ The sacred month in which Allah allowed 
you to enter the Sacred Mosque and perform Umrah 
in the seventh year after the Migration is a compen¬ 
sation for the sacred month when you were stopped 
by the idolaters from entering the Sacred Mosque in 
the sixth year after the Migration. The law of equal¬ 
ity applies when the limits are overstepped in regards 
to sacred things, such as the sacred land, the sacred 
month and being in an ordered state of purity (ihram) 
for pilgrimage to the Sacred Mosque. When someone 
wrongs you in any of these, treat them as they treated 
you, but do not go beyond what they have done: Allah 
does not love those who overstep His limits. Be mind¬ 
ful of Allah by not going beyond what He has given you permission to do. Know that Allah is with those who are mindful of 
Him, giving them success and supporting them. ||| Spend your wealth in obedience to Allah, in striving for His sake, and do 
not throw yourselves into destruction, by leaving the struggle and spending for His sake, or by throwing yourselves into some¬ 
thing that will cause your destruction. Behave with excellence and kindness in your worship, transactions and behaviour. Allah 
loves those who always do good: giving them a greater reward and leading them to true guidance. (|1| Perform Hajj and Umrah 
in a complete way, seeking only Allah’s pleasure. If you are prevented from completing them by illness or an enemy, then you 
should sacrifice what is easily available of sacrificial animals, such as camels, cows or sheep, before you take off your Ihram, 
and do not shave your heads or cut your hair until the sacrificial animals have reached their place. If you are prevented from 
entering the Sacred Sanctuary, then perform the sacrifice wherever you have stopped; yet if you can enter it, then do it on the 
Day of Sacrifice (10th of Dhu Al-Hijjah) or at least within the days of tashrlq (11, 12 and 13 of Dhu Al-Hijjah). Whoever among 
you is ill or has some problem with his hair or his head, like lice or something similar, whoever shaved his head for that reason, 
then that is not a problem; but they should instead fast for three days, or feed six poor people from the area of the Sanctuary, or 
sacrifice a sheep to be distributed among the poor of the Sanctuary. If you are living in times of peace, then whoever takes the 
opportunity to perform Umrah in the months of Hajj, enjoying in between those things that are not allowed when performing 
the pilgrimages, they should sacrifice whatever is easily available: a sheep, or a seventh of a camel or cow. If they are unable to 
make a sacrifice, then they must fast for three days during the days of Hajj to make up for it, and seven more days when they 
return home, making ten days all together. 

This practice of having a break between Umrah and Hajj and sacrificing an animal or fasting for those unable to make a sacrifice 
is only for people who do not live within or close to the Sanctuary of the Sacred Mosque. As for those who live within the Sanc¬ 
tuary or close to it, they do not do this, because they have no need to due to their constant being there and enjoying being able to 
make Umrah or Tawaf freely any other time of the year. Be mindful of Allah by following what He makes sacred law, and by 
respecting His limits, and know that Allah is firm in punishing those who go against what He instructs. 

^ Beneficial Points : 

1. The goal of fighting or struggling for the sake of Allah is to establish Allah’s order and to remove whatever stops people from 
hearing the truth or listening to it. 2. Not struggling for the sake of Allah is a cause of the nation’s destruction, because it leads 
to its weakness and encourages enemies against it. 3. The verses emphasise the obligation of completing Hajj and Umrah, and 
the permission to complete them with the sacrifice of an animal for those who are prevented from entering the Sanctuary. 


\JpSl 




Al-Baqarah 


Part 2 



















' i\ jjfeojSS 



3 .\ Q > <d\J&\ 

<$> 

^i=^a(ii^=rs -jX^iJS,\Xi&ty 



@ The time of the Hajj is the well-known months, 
starting with the month of Shawwal and ending on 
the 10th of Dhu Al-Hijjah. Sexual relations and 
things that lead to it are prohibited for any person 
who decides to perform the Hajj in these months 
once he enters the state of ihram. 

In addition, the prohibition of going against Allah 
by committing sins becomes even more empha¬ 
sised at this time due to the sacredness of the time 
and place. The pilgrim may not quarrel with any¬ 
one: causing them to become angry and leading to 
a fight. If you do any good, Allah knows and will 
reward you for it. 

To perform the Hajj, take an adequate amount of 
food and drink, but remember that the best provi¬ 
sion is being always mindful of Allah. O people of 
sound mind, fear Allah by fulfilling His instructions 
and avoiding His prohibitions. 

(Jl| There is no sin in seeking lawful provision by 
trading or other ways during the Hajj. When you 
leave Arafat after having spent the day there on the 
9th of Dhu Al-Hijjah, and when you head towards 
Muzdalifah on the night before the 10th of Dhu Al- 
Hijjah, remember Allah by glorifying and praising 
Him and by praying to Him at the sacred place in 
Muzdalifah. Remember that Allah has guided you 
to the teachings of His path, and the acts of Hajj to 
His House: you were unaware of the sacred laws 
before this. 

(jf| Then leave Arafat just as the Prophet Abraham 
used to do, and do not leave out stopping at Arafat 
as the people of ignorance used to do. Seek forgive¬ 
ness from Allah for any defects in the performance 
of the Hajj, for Allah is Forgiving towards those of His servants who repent and He is Merciful towards them. 

Hi When you have completed the acts of Hajj, remember and praise Him much, just as you boast about and praise your 
forefathers - or even more than that because every favour that you enjoy comes from Him. 

People are different: some are disbelieving idolaters who only believe in this worldly life. Such people will only ask Allah 
for the blessing of this world and its beauty in the form of health, wealth and children, and will not receive anything of 
what Allah has prepared for His faithful servants in the Afterlife. This is because of their desire for this world and their 
neglect of the Afterlife. 

dj| Yet there is another group of people who have faith in Allah and the Afterlife who ask their Lord for blessing in this 
world and the ability to do good, just as they ask Him for entry into Paradise and safety from the punishment of the fire 
of Hell. 

HI Those that pray for the good of this world and the Afterlife will receive their share of the great reward for their good 
actions in the world. Allah is swift in taking account of actions: He will reward those that do good and take those that do 
evil to task. 

® Beneficial Points : 

1 .Hajj is an act of worship in which the believer pays respects to the symbols of Allah. For this reason, Allah has prohib¬ 
ited any indecent word or action that goes against this. 

2.It is permissible to trade and seek provision during the Hajj as there is no conflict between the two acts. 

3. The pilgrim must spend the night preceding the 10th of Dhu Al-Hijjah in Muzdalifah. 

4. The pilgrim must remember Allah much when he completes the acts of Hajj. 

5. People have different goals: some are concerned with this world only and do not ask Allah for anything else; whereas 
others ask for the best of this world and the Afterlife, and that is the correct way. 




\J. 



Al-Baqarah 


Part 2 





















j j*- 9 iVj* rP| 

j ^v*^. A_-Ac 3 J *—^ j 



a^J^sV £ o^X^i? ^ j($) 



^ ^ ** j i> ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ * ** 

o/^i\ 

cS^^\Jx^ asI^=I 

»^f - ^*.%v \r>*^ 9 ^ T t'ix * 1 \' itf 

< @U_j 3 \ <i 3 S! ^ 

<$}Jy» 


|p Remember Allah by saying, ‘Allahu Akbar’ (Al¬ 
lah is greatest!), and, ‘La ilahah ilia Allah’ (There 
is no Allah except Allah), on the 11th, 12th and 
13th of Dhu Al-Hijjah. If anyone is in a hurry, he 
may leave Mina after pelting stones on the 12th of 
Dhu Al-Hijjah - and there will be no sin as Allah 
has granted that permission. It is also acceptable if 
someone stays to pelt stones on the 13 th of Dhu 
Al-Hijjah - in fact, this is better and was the action 
of the Prophet (peace be upon him). All of this ap¬ 
plies to those that are mindful of Allah during their 
Hajj and carry it out in accordance with Allah’s 
instruction. Be mindful of Allah by fulfilling His 
instructions and avoiding His prohibitions. Be sure 
that you will return to Him alone and He will rec¬ 
ompense you for your actions. 

<j| There is a type of person who is actually a Hyp¬ 
ocrite, but his speech with respect to the life of this 
world impresses you, O Prophet, and you consider 
him to be honest and sincere because of his won¬ 
derful words. However, his only goal in speaking 
words of faith is to protect his personal and finan¬ 
cial interests. He calls Allah to witness that he has 
faith and goodness in his heart whilst he is in fact 
lying: he bears great hostility and hatred for the 
Muslims. 

HI When this Hypocrite leaves you, he works hard 
to cause corruption by committing sins, and he de¬ 
stroys crops and kills animals. Allah does not love 
corruption in the land and He does not love those 
that cause corruption. 

(j| When this person who causes corruption is ad¬ 
vised to be mindful of Allah by respecting His lim¬ 
its and avoiding His prohibitions, his pride and arrogance prevents him from repenting, and he continues to sin. The only 
appropriate reward for him is entry into Hell. What a terrible place to reside in for its inhabitants! 

(jf| There is another type of person who is a believer, who will sell and give up his soul to follow his Lord and to strive in 
His path seeking His pleasure. Allah’s mercy for His servants is vast and He is Kind to them. 

HI O you who have faith in Allah and follow His Messenger, enter Islam completely and do not leave out any part of it 
like how the People of the Scripture believed in some parts of the book and disbelieved other parts. Do not follow the 
ways of Satan, because he has made it clear that he is your enemy. 

(|f| If you slip up or go astray after clear proofs have come to you, then know that Allah is Mighty in His ability and power, 
Wise in His planning and establishing of sacred laws. So, fear and glorify Him. 

HI These people who follow the path of Satan, instead of the path of truth, are waiting only for Allah to come to them, 
as befits His majesty, on the Day of Resurrection in the shadows of clouds to judge them and for the angels to come and 
surround them from all sides. At that time, Allah will judge them once and for all. To Allah alone shall all affairs relating 
to creation return. 

® Beneficial Points : 

1. In reality, righteousness is not simply the performance of many good actions; but it also means following and obeying 
the sacred laws. 

2. People will not be judged by their forms and words, but by the reality of their actions which show what is hidden in 
their hearts. 

3. Causing corruption on the earth is a common feature of those who are arrogant. Allah does not love corruption and 
those that cause corruption. 

4. A person has not truly submitted to Allah Almighty unless he totally accepts this way of life inwardly and outwardly. 






















iTT 



I AajO <J (J^ 

<jA\^ 

02^ o ^^>5 

^5 t®3 ^3ydcl-T U-i 


i\: 




(0 O Prophet, ask the Jews about how many clear 
signs proving the truthfulness of the messengers 
were given to them by Allah. Despite this they 
disbelieved and turned away from them. If anyone 
changes the favour of Allah into disbelief and de¬ 
nial after being aware of it and after it has become 
obvious, then Allah is strong in punishing the dis¬ 
believers and the deniers. 

(fi| For those who disbelieve in Allah, the world¬ 
ly life and its temporary pleasures and enjoyments 
have been made to seem glamorous. They mock 
at those who have faith in Allah and the Last Day. 
Those who are mindful of Allah by fulfilling His 
commands and avoiding His prohibitions will be 
above such people in the Afterlife when Allah will 
make them live in the gardens of Paradise. Allah 
gives without any limit or account to whichever of 
His creation He wishes. 

@ People were one community. All of them were 
in agreement and guided following the way of their 
father Adam, until the Satan misguided them. They 
were then split into believers and disbelievers. For 
this reason, Allah sent messengers bringing good 
news of the mercy of Allah for those who had faith 
in Him and followed Him and warning the disbe¬ 
lievers of the severe punishment of Allah. Together 
with the messengers, Allah also sent books contain¬ 
ing the undoubtable truth so that they could judge 
between people with respect to their disagreements. 
It was only those who were given the Torah that 
differed with regards to the matter of Muhammad 
(s) and his message despite its being clear. They did 
this out of injustice and jealousy. Allah then ena¬ 
bled the believers to recognise guidance from misguidance by His permission and will. Allah guides whoever He wishes 
to a perfectly straight path which is the path of faith. 

Do you believers think that you will enter Paradise whilst you have not faced a trial like the people of the past? They 
were afflicted with severe sickness and poverty and were shaken by frightening events to the extent that they wanted the 
help of Allah to come as quick as possible; and the messenger and the believers with him began saying, 4 When is the help 
of Allah coming?’ The help of Allah is close to those that have faith and trust in Him. 

@ Your Companions, O Prophet, ask you what they should spend from their wealth and where they should allocate it. 
Say to them in reply: Any permissible and pure wealth you spend should be given to parents, close relatives in need, 
needy orphans, the poor who have no wealth and the traveller who is cut-off from his family and home. Allah knows of 
any good you do as believers, no matter how small. Nothing is hidden from Him and He will reward you for it. 

® Beneficial Points : 

1 .Being ungrateful for Allah’s favours and not using them in His service will result in their disappearance and them being 
turned into a source of hardship. 

2. Allah has created His servants on the natural path of monotheism and belief in Him. Satan and his helpers are the ones 
who then turned some of them away from this natural path to idolatry. 

3. The greatest loss leading to failure is when the nation differs in its book and sacred law, and begin cursing one another 
and declaring one another disbelievers. 

4. Guidance to the truth of what people differ in and recognizing the right path is in Allah’s Hand. It can be requested from 
Him by believing in and submitting to Him. 

5. It is from Allah’s natural law that He tests His faithful servants according to their degree of faith and reliance on Him. 

6. The greatest thing that will assist in being patient at the time of calamity is to follow the example of the righteous. 


its iS Ai ’LU \ Cjt 4 





















rt 





*1 ' \Sr, ^ ° * ^ 



d^\2d£\3 

3L£>3 £>)&<3jj 

^ s' l ^ 0 0 




@ Fighting in Allah’s path has been chosen for 
believers even though it is something that is nat¬ 
urally disliked, because it means risking one’s life 
and wealth. However, you may dislike something 
when, it is good and beneficial. An example of this 
is striving in Allah’s path, which means - in addi¬ 
tion to the great reward - the defeat of the enemy 
and promotion of Allah’s word. 

On the other hand, you may like something whilst 
it is bad and harmful to you, such as holding back 
from fighting: this will result in you being defeated 
and the enemy’s gaining authority over you. Al¬ 
lah knows full well what is good and what is not, 
whereas you do not. Therefore, follow His instruc¬ 
tion which is better for you. 

@ The people ask you, O Prophet, about the law 
regarding fighting in the sacred months of Dhu Al- 
Qa‘dah, Dhu Al-Hijjah, Muharram and Rajab. Say 
to them: Fighting in these months is a serious of¬ 
fence in the sight of Allah and is detested, just as 
the idolaters’ preventing from the path of Allah is 
also disapproved. Blocking the believers’ access to 
the Sacred Mosque and removing the people of the 
Sacred Mosque from it is worse than fighting in a 
sacred month in the sight of Allah. 

Their idolatry is worse than killing. The idolaters 
will continue their oppression by fighting you until 
they turn you away from your path of truth towards 
their false path, if they are able to. If anyone turns 
back from the path of Allah and dies disbelieving in 
Allah, his good actions shall be reduced to nothing 
and in the Afterlife he will end up in the fire of Hell, 
where he will live eternally. 

jj| Those who have faith in Allah and His Messenger, who leave their homes as emigrants towards Allah and His Mes¬ 
senger, and fight to promote Allah’s word are the ones who are eager for Allah’s mercy and forgiveness. Allah forgives 
the sins of His servants and is merciful towards them. 

@ O Prophet! Your Companions ask you about wine (which refers to anything that impairs the mind or intoxicates it), 
with respect to the legal aspects of drinking, selling and purchasing it. They also ask you about gambling (which refers 
to wealth taken in a competition between two people in which both contribute to the winning total). Say in response to 
them: They both have many spiritual and material harms, such as loss of intellect and wealth and the creation of hatred 
and enmity. On the other hand, there are a few benefits, such as financial reward for the winner of a bet. However, the 
harm and sin resulting from them is greater than the benefit; so, a logical person should avoid such actions. This statement 
of Allah lays the foundation for the prohibition of wine. 

They also ask you, O Prophet, about the amount that they should spend in charity. Say in reply to them: Spend whatever 
is easy and in excess of your needs. With such clear explanations, Allah describes the sacred law to you so that you may 
reflect. 

Initially, this was the law regarding charity, but later Allah established the obligation of Zakat, which requires paying a 
set amount on certain possessions, if one has owned such possessions for a particular period of time. 

® Beneficial Points : 

1. Not knowing the end result of a thing sometimes makes a person dislike a thing that benefits him and like a thing that 
harms him. A person must ask Allah to guide him to the right path. 2. Islam came to preserve goodness and prohibit any 
violation of it: the worst form of violation is preventing people from the path of Allah. 3. The disbelievers will remain 
enemies of Islam and Muslims until they remove them from their path. Allah will weaken the plot of the disbelievers. 4. 
Faith in Allah, emigration to Him and striving in His path are the most effective means by which a person can gain Allah’s 
mercy and forgiveness. 5. In consideration of people’s best interests, the sacred law has prohibited anything where the 
harm is greater than the benefit, even though there may be some benefit in it. 


9+ * iA j ^ ys s f 


dilj 

(Jw) 


Al-Baqarah 


Part 2 





















Ip Allah has established these rules so that you 
may think about what benefits you in this world and 
the Afterlife. Your Companions ask you, O Proph¬ 
et, about the guardianship of orphans and how they 
should deal with them: whether they can mix their 
wealth with that of the orphans for expenses, food 
and accommodation? Say in reply to them: If you 
are kind to them by arranging their affairs without 
taking anything in return and without touching their 
wealth, it is better in the sight of Allah and carries 
greater reward. It is also better because you will re¬ 
ceive your full wealth. However, there is no harm if 
you mix their wealth with yours for living expens¬ 
es, as they are your brothers in faith and it is normal 
for brothers to help and look after the affairs of one 
another. Allah knows the guardian who, by mixing 
the wealth of orphans with his, means harm and the 
one who means well. If He wished to make it diffi¬ 
cult for you with respect to orphans, He would have 
done so. Instead, He has made it easy for you to 
deal with them as the sacred law is based on ease. 
Allah is Mighty and nothing can overpower Him. 
He is Wise in His planning and legislation. |IJ Do 
not get married, O believers, to those women who 
give partners to Allah until they have faith in Him 
alone and enter the path of Islam. A woman who is 
a slave but has faith in Allah and His Messenger is 
better than a free woman who worships idols, even 
though you may be impressed by her beauty and 
wealth. Do not give Muslim women in marriage to 
men who are idolaters. A slave man who has faith 
in Allah and His Messenger is better than a free 
man who is an idolater, even though he may seem 
impressive to you. Men and women who commit 
idolatry, invite by their statements and actions, towards that which will lead to entering the fire of Hell. Allah, on the other 
hand, invites to good actions which will lead to entry into Paradise and forgiveness of sins by His permission and grace. 
Allah makes His verses clear for people so that they may learn and act obediently. |}| O Prophet! Your Companions 
ask you about menses (which is the blood of menstruation that naturally comes out of the womb at certain times of the 
month). Say in reply to them: Menses is harmful to the man and woman, so avoid sexual intercourse during this time. Do 
not approach them for sexual intercourse until the blood stops and they have cleaned themselves by taking a bath. If the 
blood has stopped and they have cleaned themselves, then you may have sexual intercourse with them through the vagi¬ 
na in the manner that Allah has permitted for you. Allah loves those that frequently repent from their sins and are extra 
mindful of cleanliness. (j| Your wives are a place for you to sow your seed: they produce children for you just as the land 
produces crops. So approach the plantation, which is the vagina, from whichever direction and in whichever manner you 
wish as long as intercourse takes place in the vagina. Send forth something good for yourselves, such as having sexual 
intercourse with the intention of gaining closeness to Allah and with the hope of pious offspring. Be mindful of Allah by 
fulfilling His instructions and avoiding His prohibitions, such as those relating to women. Know that you are to meet Him 
on the Day of Resurrection and will have to stand before Him to receive the reward for your actions. O Prophet, give the 
believers good news of everlasting blessings that will surely please them when they meet their Lord: seeing His Blessed 
Face. |f| Do not use the name of Allah in your oath as an excuse for not doing good e.g. being mindful of Him, being 
virtuous, and reconciling between people. Yet if you have taken an oath not to do any good actions, then do good actions 
and make a compensation for the oath. Allah hears your statements and knows your actions and will reward you for them. 

Beneficial Points : 

1. Marriage between Muslims and idolaters is prohibited due to the huge gap between faith and idolatry. 2. The verses 
indicate that a guardian is necessary for the contract of marriage, since Allah addresses the guardians with respect to the 
prohibition of giving women in marriage to idolaters. 3. Sexual intercourse with a woman during menstruation is prohib¬ 
ited until she becomes clean and takes a bath. But intimate acts except intercourse are permitted during menstruation and 
before a purifying bath. 4. The sacred law requires physical purity from all types of filth. 

5. The believer is encouraged to focus on the Afterlife in everything, even in acts of pleasure, and to do good actions that 
will benefit him in the next life. 


















rn 




O^C? Cst %-^jyiS- 4J^\3j£s4 ^\s 

l)^,J 0^>^4-*^ 5^3^ 




(jf| Allah will not take you to account for those oaths 
that you swear unintentionally, such as if someone 
carelessly says, ‘No, by Allah!’ or ‘Yes, by Allah!’ ^J| 

For such oaths there is no need to make any com¬ 
pensation, nor any further consequences. However, 

He will take you to account for intentional oaths. 

Allah forgives and tolerates the sins of His servants 
and is not hasty in sending punishment. 

(jfl For those who swear an oath not to have sexu¬ 
al intercourse with their wives, there is a waiting 
period not longer than four months, starting from 
the date of the oath. If he abandons the oath and en¬ 
gages in sexual intercourse after having sworn not 
to, and this happens within the four months period, 
then Allah forgives them. Allah is merciful and has 
established compensation as a way out from such 
an oath. 

{jj If such a man is determined to continue his oath 
and so passes the four months period, intending by 
that a divorce, then Allah hears their statements, in¬ 
cluding the divorce, and He knows their states and 
intentions and will reward them for that. 

(j| Divorced women must not remarry after a di¬ 
vorce for three menstrual periods. If they are true 
in their faith in Allah and the Last Day, they may 
not hide the foetus that Allah has created in their 
wombs. Their husbands, who issued the divorce, 
have the first right to recall them during the waiting 
period if their intention is to live well with them and 
to cancel what has occurred because of the divorce. 

Wives have rights and obligations like those of hus¬ 
bands in a manner that people consider fair. Men 
have a higher rank than them in terms of responsi¬ 
bility and with respect to divorce. Allah is Mighty and nothing can overcome His decree. He is Wise in His legislation 
and planning. 

(j| The divorce, after which a husband may recall his wife, can only happen twice. He may divorce her the first time, 
recall her, divorce her again and recall her once more. After two divorces he must either keep her in his marriage, living 
in a good way with her, or divorce her for the third time, being good to her by fulfilling her rights. Then the wife is tem¬ 
porarily prohibited for him until she marries another man (see Surah Al-Baqarah: 230, below). At the time of divorce, 
husbands may not take any part of the dowry that they had given their wives. 

However, if a woman is unhappy with her husband because of his character or looks, and the couple are of the view that, 
because of this, they will be not be able to fulfil the rights of marriage, then they should present the matter to a person 
related to them or someone who is familiar with them. If they feel that the couple will not be able to fulfil the rights of 
marriage, then there is no harm if the woman offers to give something to the husband in return for a divorce. 

These laws of the shariah are the criterion for the lawful and unlawful, so do not overstep them. Whoever oversteps the 
limits of Allah with regards to the lawful and the unlawful, then such people are wronging their own selves by bringing 
them to destruction and exposing them to Allah’s anger and justice. 

HI If the husband divorces her for the third time, he may not remarry her until she gets married to another man in a valid 
marriage that is genuine and not merely contracted to make her lawful for the original husband, and where sexual inter¬ 
course has taken place in this later marriage. Should the second husband divorce her or pass away, the woman and her 
first husband may return to one another with a new marriage contract and dowry, if they feel that they will fulfil the rights 
of each other set-out in the sacred law. These rules are made clear by Allah for people who know His laws and limits, as 
they are the ones who benefit from them. 

® Beneficial Points : 

1. Allah explains the laws of marriage and divorce in full so that people know the limits of the lawful and the unlawful 
and do not overstep these limits. 

2. In married life, the couple must behave in a good manner. If this is not possible, then there is nothing wrong in divorce; 
and either of the partners may ask for it. 




Al-Baqarah 


36 


Part 2 



















:* y 


B&i&Efil; 


:s s 



ij^Jy^ > C^J>y ^J 
1 iy~& ^ j ^j!jvJ)<1?x& 

\ (fy^LAcs o' \jfic^^\\jjfe^ ^£2*1 

t>0-3>4 

ota liff i (3^? ^o ;; 3^j’^S^i /iV i3^ jtj i^S ) I® -43 

44 


(j|| When you divorce women and they approach 
the end of their waiting period, you have the right 
to take them back or to leave them in a good way 
until their waiting period is over. Do not take them 
back in order to oppress and harm them, as was the 
practice in the period before Islam. Whoever acts 
with the aim of causing harm to them has wronged 
himself by exposing himself to sin and punishment. 
Do not make Allah’s words the object of mockery 
and play. Remember Allah’s favours on you: most 
importantly, the revelation you have received in the 
form of the Qur’an and Sunnah, through which He 
reminds you to encourage and warn you. Fear Allah 
by fulfilling His instructions and avoiding His pro¬ 
hibitions. Know that Allah knows everything and 
that nothing is hidden from Him. He will reward 
you for your actions. 

(j|| When you divorce women less than three times 
and their waiting period ends, do not stop them 
from returning to their husbands with a new mar¬ 
riage contract if they wish to do so and they agree 
with their husbands. This law prohibiting them 
from being prevented is a piece of advice for that 
person who has faith in Allah and the Last Day. If 
you obey, this will bring greater good to you, and 
keep your honour and actions free of impurities. 
Allah knows the reality and outcome of matters, 
whereas you do not. 

HI Mothers who intend to complete the period of 
breastfeeding should nurse their children for two 
full years. The husband and father of a child is 
responsible for the maintenance and clothing of a 
divorced mother who breast feeds her child in ac¬ 
cordance with the customs of society that do not go against the sacred law. No person is burdened beyond what he is able 
to do. 

No parent is allowed to use the child as a means to harm the other. The heir (who would inherit from the child if the child 
were to pass away leaving behind wealth) shall be responsible, if the father dies without leaving any wealth, for the same 
obligations as that of the father. 

If the parents decide to wean the child before two years finish, then there is no sin on them, if this is done after full consul¬ 
tation and agreement that it is in the child’s best interests. If you wish to hire wet-nurses for your children instead of their 
mothers, there is no sin in doing so provided you pay the agreed wages of such wet-nurses without any shortfall or delay. 
Be mindful of Allah by fulfilling His instructions and avoiding His prohibitions, and know that Allah sees everything you 
do and nothing is hidden from Him. He will reward you for any action you do. 

® Beneficial Points : 

1. A man is prohibited from keeping his wife in marriage with the intention of causing harm to her if he does not wish to 
live with her - this is oppression. 

2. It is prohibited for a guardian to prevent a woman from getting married to a suitable match or from going back to her 
first husband, if she so desires. 

3. Following the sacred law with respect to family relations brings goodness. 

4. The sacred law has secured the mother’s right to nurse her child, even if she is divorced. The husband, in this case, is 
still required to provide her maintenance as long as she nurses his child. 

5. Allah has prohibited the married couple from using their children as a means of causing harm to one another. 

6. It is encouraged that all affairs related to married life be based on consultation and agreement between the married 
couple. 


1^1 






Al-Baqarah 


37 


Part 2 





















j ij 

ta 

i&rQkiJfl 



i If Mi I 

=M iMM iM £*S | 

^^sJ0a^jS^iS 

\^Xj^oJJjS% j^==^ 0^I 

*lH3i \JjJil? oi 


/• * 


>4J^t 


^ OJ 






JSj (j\ '* ^ 


<J^ ( 


|p When someone passes away and leaves behind 
a wife who is not pregnant, it is the duty of such 
a woman to wait for a period of four months and 
ten days, in which she must not leave the husband’s 
home, beautify herself or get married. Once this 
period ends, there is no blame on their guardians 
if these women do these actions, which were pre¬ 
viously prohibited during the waiting period, as 
long as it is done in a manner acceptable to society 
and the sacred law. Allah is well aware of what you 
do. None of your private or public actions are con¬ 
cealed from Him; and He will reward you for them. 

(jf| There is no sin on you if you hint to your desire 
to propose to a woman who is still in her waiting 
period after a divorce or after the death of her hus¬ 
band. For example, a person may say, ‘When your 
waiting period is over, let me know’. There is also 
no sin on you if you keep this desire to yourselves. 

Allah knows that you will mention them because of 
your strong desire to marry, so He has allowed you 
to give a hint without being open. 

Beware of secretly making any promise to marry 
them whilst they are still in their waiting period. 

However, you may give a hint to them in the man¬ 
ner that is acceptable; but do not confirm the mar¬ 
riage contract in the period of waiting. 

Know that Allah is aware of what is in your hearts, 
so be mindful of Him and do not go against His 
instruction. Know that Allah Forgiving to the per¬ 
son who repents to Him; and that He is tolerant and 
does not often quickly punish. 

HI There is no sin on you if you divorce your wives 
with whom you have entered into marriage before 
you have sexual intercourse with them and before you fix a dowry for them. If you must divorce them in such a situation, 
they will not be entitled to any dowry from you; but they must be given something that they will enjoy, to make it easy 
on their feelings. This must be done by both a rich and a poor man according to their means. This gift is binding on those 
who wish to do good in their actions and dealings. 

(jf| If you divorce your wives with whom you have entered into marriage before having sexual intercourse with them 
and you had fixed the amount of the dowry, you will have to pay half of this amount to them, unless they give up this 
right of theirs or the husband wishes to pay the full dowry. To give up your right is closer to Mindfulness. Do not forget 
to show kindness and compassion to one another in matters of rights. Allah sees what you do, so try to do what is best to 
earn His reward. 

® Beneficial Points : 

1. A waiting period is established for a widow in which she is not permitted to beautify herself or get married for a period 
of four months and ten days. 

2. A proposal may not be made to a woman whilst she in the waiting period, but a hint of the desire to marry her may 
be given without any clear mention of it. This applies even if the woman has been divorced by her husband three times. 

3. A believer is aware that Allah is watching him; and this makes him mindful of Allah and stops him from going against 
His sacred law. 

4. If a man divorces his wife before consummation of the marriage, he must give her half of the fixed dowry. If there was 
no fixed dowry, he must give her a gift that she is happy with. 

5. Dealings between spouses and relatives should be in an acceptable manner, based on forgiveness and pardon. 


oyL^o' 

XL 








JoU-j 4Ji\ Ci\ 




o 



























||| Guard your prayers by fulfilling them complete¬ 
ly as Allah has instructed. In particular, guard the 
middle prayer, which is the ‘asr (afternoon) prayer; 
and stand before Allah in submission and devotion. 
HI If you face danger from an enemy or any oth¬ 
er danger, and you are not able to offer the prayer 
completely, then pray whilst walking or riding, on 
camels, horses, or in any way you can. If the danger 
has gone, remember Allah as He has taught you: 
remembering Him in the most complete manner 
within the prayer. Also, remember Him for His hav¬ 
ing taught you guidance and given you light which 
you were previously unaware of. 

HI Those of you that pass away leaving behind 
wives must make a bequest for them to be provided 
with accommodation and maintenance for a period 
of one year in which your heirs may not remove 
them. This is to make up for the loss they have suf¬ 
fered and in respect for the deceased. If they leave 
before the end of the year by their own choice, there 
will be no sin on either you or them for what they 
do with themselves in terms of their beautification. 
Allah is Mighty and none can overpower Him. He 
is Wise in His planning and legislation. 

It should be noted that most commentators are of 
the view that the law contained in this verse has 
been abrogated by the verse: ‘When someone 
passes away and leaves behind a wife who is not 
pregnant, it is the duty of these women to wait for 
a period of four months and ten days...’ [ Surah 
Al-Baqarah: 234]. 

Hi Divorced women should be gifted something of 
clothing, money etc. This is to make-up for their emotional suffering because of the divorce. Such provision must be in 
keeping with the financial position of the husband; and it is a duty on those who are mindful of Allah by fulfilling His 
instructions and avoiding His prohibitions. 

HI As with the previous explanation, Allah explains these verses - containing His limits and laws - to the believers so 
that they understand and practice them, and so achieve the good of this world and the Afterlife. 

HI Do you not know, O Prophet, about those who left their homes in huge numbers fearing death due to the plague or 
something similar? 

This refers to a group of people from the Israelites. Allah said to them, ‘Die!’ and they did. Then Allah brought them 
back to life to show them that everything is in His Hands and that they have no control over any benefit or harm. Allah is 
Gracious and Bountiful to people, but most people are ungrateful for His favours. 

HI Fight, O believers, the enemies of Allah: in support of His path and to promote His Word. Know that Allah hears your 
statements and knows your intentions and actions, and that He will reward you for them. 

IP Who will act as a lender and spend his wealth in the path of Allah, willingly with a good intention so that this may 
come back to him multiplied? Allah restricts and widens provision and health in accordance with His wisdom and justice. 
In the Afterlife, you will return to Him alone and He will give you a reward for your actions. 

® Beneficial Points : 

1. The verses encourage people to guard the prayers and offer them perfectly by fulfilling all their essentials and prereq¬ 
uisites. If this is difficult, a person may pray in whichever manner is easy for him. 

2. Allah’s mercy towards His servants is obvious, as He has explained to them His verses in a perfect manner. 

3. At times, Allah tests some of His servants by reducing their provision and He tests others by giving them much provi¬ 
sion: He does all of this in accordance with His absolute wisdom. 


(Sts <4-^ 


Al-Baqarah 


Part 2 


















|p Do you not know, O Prophet, about those no¬ 
bles from the Israelites after the time of Moses who 
said to a prophet of theirs, ‘Set up for us a king and 
we will fight alongside him in Allah’s path’? The 
prophet replied, ‘It may be that if Allah makes fight¬ 
ing obligatory, you will not fight! ’ They denied that 
this would happen and insisted, ‘What would stop 
us from fighting in Allah’s path when our enemies 
have removed us from our homes and have taken 
our children as prisoners?’ Yet when Allah made 
fighting obligatory on them, they all turned away, 
except a few of them. Allah knows the wrongdoers 
who broke their promise and turned away from His 
instruction; and He will repay them for their action. 
HI Their prophet said to them, ‘Allah has appointed 
Saul as your king, under whose banner you must 
fight’. Their leaders objected to this appointment 
and said, ‘How can he rule over us when we have 
a greater right to rule than he does, since he is not 
from the children of kings and he has not been giv¬ 
en vast wealth which he can use in his rule!’ Their 
prophet said to them, ‘Allah has selected him over 
you and has given him great knowledge and phys¬ 
ical strength. Allah grants authority to whomever 
He wishes in accordance with His wisdom and mer¬ 
cy. Allah is Bountiful and grants to whomever He 
wishes. He knows which of His creation is most 
deserving’. 

HI Their prophet said to them that the mark of 
his being truly chosen as their king was that Allah 
would return to them the Ark. This was a chest re¬ 
vered by the Israelites which was taken away from 
them. In it there was tranquillity and relics left be- 


ifejl 

4==^4(^s^===i4 

yZ ***.“£ » 4 <*> 'Z * ^ ^ i 



Al-Baqarah 


hind by the family of Moses and Aaron, such as the staff and a few tablets. In that there is a clear sign if you are true 
believers. 

® Beneficial Points : 

1. One of the main reasons for fighting is in response to oppression of people who remove them from their homes and 
violate their rights. 

2. The verses indicate the most important attributes of a leader who is qualified to lead people: knowledge of what he 
leads them in and strength in that. 

3. The verses remind those who lead people not to be deceived by their words and to confirm and test their actions. 

4. Allah chooses whomever He wishes from His creation. Authority is in His control and He gives it to whomever He 
wishes in accordance with His wisdom and knowledge. 

5. Sometimes the rules used by people to judge others are not the same as those used by Allah. 






















V Aj&rf 

ILL 


4S3M&M \ 




4 iS^sJ^ t>*S! I'^.jA-jIS 

4.313^1 \^\J jA_3ta 

^33 d/tj^===> ^\\yd\J>>j^4r>\ 'j yiM 313 





I 




When Saul set out with his warriors, he said to 
them, ‘Allah will test you with a river. If anyone 
drinks from it, he will not be on my path and must 
not join me in fighting. The person who does not 
drink from it will be on my path and will join me 
in the fight. If someone drinks a handful of water, 
this will be forgiven’. When they reached the riv¬ 
er, all the warriors drank from its water, except a 
few of them who held back despite being extremely 
thirsty. After Saul had crossed the river with the be¬ 
lievers, some of the warriors said, ‘We do not have 
the ability to fight Goliath and his army’. Those that 
were convinced that they would meet Allah on the 
Day of Resurrection said to them, ‘So many believ¬ 
ing groups small in number have defeated a disbe¬ 
lieving group large in number with Allah’s permis¬ 
sion and assistance. Victory is based on faith and 
not numbers. Allah is with the patient ones among 
His servants: He assists and gives them victory’. 
dj| When they came out to face Goliath and his 
army, they prayed to Allah, saying: Our Lord, grant 
us patience in our hearts, make our feet firm so that 
we do not flee or lose courage before our enemies, 
and give us Your assistance and support against the 
disbelieving people. 

(j| They defeated them by Allah’s will. The prophet 
of Allah, David, killed their leader Goliath and Al¬ 
lah gave him kingship and prophethood and taught 
him many sciences as He willed, including those 
that are beneficial for this world and those for the 
hearafter. If it were not the system of Allah to drive 
back the evil of some people by means of others, 
there would be corruption on earth as the evil ones 
would gain authority. However, Allah is Bountiful to all of His creation. 

HI Those are the clear verses of Allah which are recited to you, O Prophet, and they contain true stories and just laws. 
You are one of the messengers of the Lord of the Worlds. 

® Beneficial Points : 

1. A leader should put his army through various types of tests in order to prove those who are patient from those who are 
not. 

2. Victory does not lie in numbers and preparation only, but the help and support from Allah plays a crucial part in 
achieving victory. 

3. At the time of hardship and difficulty only those whose hearts are filled with conviction of faith in Allah will remain 
patient. 

4. Calling upon Allah with a sincere heart and with humility is a sure way for prayers to be answered, especially at the 
time of battle. 

5. It is Allah’s order and wisdom that He repels the evil of some on earth by using others. 

6. The Qur’an contains true stories and just laws that prove the truth of the prophethood and message of Muhammad 
(peace be upon him) 




























''^C^'_f==6j .^^0 \X-^'^'^-J* S^-Oo 

^ ^ j f ** s s * "Z j » *? 

^lTV^-^J O'*' CAj^LA 


ya\u^ 


a\ft 4jr^\\4j\3{^)jo 


\i* 


. i. 

<>■ 49 . , 

* -7f " 

A*i£- 


(jp Allah favoured some of those messengers men¬ 
tioned to you over others with respect to their rev¬ 
elation, followers and ranks. Some of them Allah 
spoke to, such as Moses, and others He granted 
a high rank, such as Muhammad (peace be upon 
him) - who was sent to the entire humankind as the 
last of the prophets and whose nation was preferred 
over all other communities. 

Allah gave Jesus, son of Mary, clear miracles 
confirming his prophethood, such as bringing the 
dead to life and curing the leper and the blind; and 
supported him with the angel Gabriel to give him 
strength in fulfilling Allah’s instruction. 

If Allah had willed, those that came after the mes¬ 
sengers would not have fought amongst themselves 
after having received clear signs; but they disa¬ 
greed and were divided. Some of them had faith 
in Allah, whilst others did not. If Allah had willed, 
they would not have fought with each other; but Al¬ 
lah does as He wills: He guides whomever He wills 
to faith through His mercy and grace, and He does 
not guide whomever He wishes by His justice and 
wisdom. 

(jf| O you who have faith in Allah and follow 
His Messenger, spend from the different types of 
permissible wealth that Allah has provided for you 
before the Day of Resurrection comes. On that 
day, there will be no sale so that a person may buy 
something of use to him, nor friendship that will be 
of benefit at a time of difficulty, and no intermediary 
that will protect him from any harm or bring any 
benefit unless Allah allows. The disbelievers are in 
the wrong due to their denial of Allah. Ai-Baqarah 

(jf| Allah is the One Who alone deserves to be worshipped. He is the One who lives perfectly without any death or 
deficiency. He exists by Himself and is not in need of any of His creation. The creation only exists through Him and is 
always in need of Him. Drowsiness or sleep does not come upon Him due to the perfection of His life and existence. He 
alone controls the heavens and the earth. No one can intercede before Him without His acceptance and permission. He 
knows what has happened in the pa& and what will happen in the future. The creation has no share in His knowledge 
unless He wills to grant them some of it. His Throne covers the va&ness of the heavens and the earth. It is not difficult 
for Him to preserve the heaven and the earth. He is High in His essence and attributes and Great in His dominion and 
authority. 

(j| No one is forced to enter the religion of Islam, as it is clearly the true religion and there is no need to force anyone 
to believe in it. Truth stands clear from falsehood. Whoever rejects all those things that are worshipped besides Allah 
and frees himself from them, and has faith in Allah alone, has held on to the &ronge& rope for salvation on the Day of 
Resurrection and which will never break. Allah hears the statements of His servants, knows their actions and will reward 
them accordingly. 

® Beneficial Points : 

1. Allah has given different ranks to the various messengers and prophets in accordance with His knowledge and wisdom. 

2. Allah spoke directly to some messengers, such as Moses and Muhammad (peace be upon them). 

3. Faith, guidance, disbelief and misguidance are all based on Allah’s will and decree. To Him belongs perfect wisdom: 
if He willed, He would have guided the entire creation. 

4. The verse of the Throne (verse 255) is the greatest verse in the Qur’an, because of what it mentions within it of the 
attributes of Allah’s Lordship (Rububiyyah) and that only He has the right to be worshipped (Uluhiyyah) as well as a 
clarification of some of His Attributes. 

5. The act of entering into Islam and becoming a Muslim must be based on sincere acceptance and willingness because 
there is no compulsion in the path of Allah. 

6. The best way to gain happiness in this world and success in the Afterlife is by holding on to the Qur’an and Sunnah of 
the Prophet (peace be upon him). 


CA oo -J3 ^ \ 



















^uii^N JuJiT 

Jij-j^jt 0 j^iX- 

i^Ij 4ji\ 6^ \3 j\s <L^ij 

A\ ' >' *\< ~A\s ~**\\ kS* disbelievers are Satan and his assistants who make 

^ disbelief seem beautiful to them, and who take 

them from the light of faith and knowledge into 
the darkness of disbelief and ignorance. They are 
the people of the fire of Hell who will live there 
eternally. 

Since Allah mentioned the two groups, He gives an 
example of each of them in the following verse: 

® O Prophet, do you know about the arrogance of 
the rebellious one who argued with Abraham about 
Allah’s Lordship and Oneness? This happened 
because Allah had given him the power to rule, yet 
he transgressed and took advantage of his position. 
Abraham explained to him the attributes of his Lord 
by saying, 4 My Lord is the One Who gives life to 
the creation and causes them to die’. The rebel 
1 0J^3 It stubbornly said, ‘I too can give life and cause death. 

J ^ ^ ^ ^ I can kill whomever I wish and pardon whomever I 

wish’. Abraham then put forward another stronger 







W Allah takes care of those who have faith in Him. 
He grants them success and victory and takes them 
out of the darkness of disbelief and ignorance into 
the light of faith and knowledge. The friends of the 
disbelievers are Satan and his assistants who make 
disbelief seem beautiful to them and who take 
them from the light of faith and knowledge into the 
darkness of disbelief and ignorance. They are the 
people of the Fire who will remain there forever. 
Allah takes care of those who have faith in Him: 
He gives them success and victory and takes them 
out of the darkness of disbelief and ignorance into 
the light of faith and knowledge. The friends of the 


argument by saying to him, ‘The Lord I worship is 
the One Who brings the sun from the direction of the eaSt; so, you should bring it from the direction of weSt!’ The rebel 
was shocked and defeated by this strong argument. Allah does not allow wrongdoers to be guided and traverse His Path 
because of their disobedience and rebellion. 

Or do you know the example of the one who passed by a town in which the roofs had fallen, the walls had collapsed 
and the people had died, making it a deserted ruin? This man said in surprise, ‘How will Allah ever bring these people 
back to life?’ Allah then caused him to die for a period of one hundred years and then brought him back to life and asked 
him, ‘How long were you dead for?’ He replied, ‘I remained like that for one day or less than a day’. Allah then said to 
him, ‘Actually, you were like that for one hundred years. Look at the food you had with you, which has not gone bad in 
spite of this long period! Look at your dead donkey! I want to make you a clear sign for showing people the power I have 
to bring them back to life. Look at the bones of the donkey that are scattered. I will lift them, put them together, clothe 
them with flesh and then give them life again’. When he saw this, the reality became clear to him and he realized the 
power of Allah, and said in respect, ‘I know that Allah has power over everything’. 

^ Beneficial Points : 

1. The distinguishing feature of the people of faith is that they have guidance and insight from Allah in all their worldly 
and religious affairs, unlike the people of disbelief. 

2. One of the main causes of rebellion is a person being deceived by power and authority making him blind to his reality. 

3. It is acceptable to debate with the people of falsehood in order to explain the truth to them and show them their error. 

4. Allah’s power is great and He is able to do anything, including giving life after death. 


^ s' § 

C-Bj 

cilj ]&>\j \ j 






















|p O Prophet, remember when Abraham said, ‘My 
Lord, show me how the dead come back to life’. 

Allah said to him, ‘Do you not have faith in this?’ 

Abraham replied, ‘I do have faith, but I ju& want to 
put my heart at ease’. So, Allah instructed him, say¬ 
ing, ‘Take four birds and tame them. Then cut them 
up into pieces and place a piece of each bird on the 
hills around you. Then call those birds and you will 
see that they will come quickly to you, having been 
brought back to life. Know, O Abraham, that Allah 
is Mighty in His dominion and Wise in His instruc¬ 
tion and legislation’. 

HI The example of the reward of the believers who 
spend their wealth in Allah’s path is like that of a 
grain that is planted by a farmer in fertile ground. 

This grain then produces seven spikes, each carry¬ 
ing a hundred grains. Allah multiplies the reward 
for whomever of His servants He wishes and gives 
them their reward without account. Allah is Bounti¬ 
ful and Giving and He knows who deserves to have 
their reward multiplied. 

djl Those who spend their wealth for Allah’s obedi¬ 
ence and pleasure, and do not destroy their reward 
afterwards by reminding people of their favour by 
their words or actions, will receive their reward 
from their Lord. They will have no fear for the fu¬ 
ture nor any grief over the pa& because of the great 
bounties they will be enjoying. 

(jfl A kind word that makes a believer happy or for¬ 
giveness of the one who is ill-mannered is better 
than charity followed by harm caused by reminding 
the person of the favour. Allah is in no need of His 
servants; and because He is tolerant with them. He 
does not often quickly punish. 

(jl| O you who have faith in Allah and follow His Messenger, do not ruin the reward of your charity by boating about it 
and hurting the person to whom you gave it. A person who does this is like one who spends to be seen and praised by peo¬ 
ple, and does not have faith in Allah and in the reward and punishment on the Day of Resurrection. This is like a smooth 
&one on which there is some du&: when heavy rain falls onto it, the du& is washed away and the &one is left smooth with 
nothing on it. Similarly, the reward of the actions and charity of those who show off does not remain in the sight of Allah. 
Allah does not guide disbelievers to what pleases Him and benefits them in their actions and spending, 
v* Beneficial Points : 

1. The levels of faith and stages of conviction have no limit. The more a person thinks about the universal signs of 
Allah, the more his faith and conviction increases. 

2. The resurrection of people after their death is a clear proof of Allah’s perfect ability and greatness. 

3. There is great virtue and a huge reward for spending in Allah’s path when this is done with a good intention and is 
not followed by insults or reminders. 

4. One of the best things a person can do is to show good character by saying or doing something good and forgiving 
the person who is bad to him. 

5. The reward of charity is lost when a person reminds people of it. 


\ ^ v_Li= '4$ j 




Al-Baqarah 


44 

Part 3 p 






















i 6 



\ca\LJ 5 S 




j^io^o'' ^^=i^-\ ^0-^4? o4ii\j 

iSji A 3_j^==^ %>\j^?\j oyili ^^=>^.1^3 


| diil>^=>cJ9J\®-\s_)lj ILajc^s 

^ J^rt 

Ui^>-\ l^|3^®\ * Oi-5 ^ 

^ } ^s> (jl \^iSc\j o\ "S 3 

L p^=^\j jjlji v^i^^iii_^i0 JL^ 

JLAc- £-tS^ ^-^ a5 -J <^2- ®5^r*^ p^s^-LaO^U^ 

Jja3 A <v^ t = ^ -\ A^-^====l^ 

w Al-Baqarah 


The example of believers who spend their 
wealth seeking Allah’s pleasure, with firm convic¬ 
tion in their hearts of Allah’s promise, is like that 
of a garden on high fertile ground on which heavy 
rain falls and causes it to produce double its crop. 
In addition, if it does not receive heavy rain then 
the light rain that falls on it is sufficient because 
the land is fertile. In the same way, the little that is 
spent by the sincere ones is accepted by Allah and 
its reward is multiplied. Allah sees what you do: 
He knows who is sincere and who is not, and will 
reward each one accordingly. 

In the next verse, Allah gives the example of the 
person who spends his wealth for show: 

(jl| Do any of you wish to have a garden with date- 
palms and grapevines through which sweet waters 
flow and which has all kinds of wholesome fruit? 
When the owner of the garden becomes old and is 
no longer able to work and earn, and he has weak 
young children who also cannot work, a strong 
fiery wind strikes this garden and it bums down 
completely at a time when he is mo& in need of 
it because of his old age and for his weak young 
children. The condition of a person who spends his 
wealth to show people is like that of this man: when 
he comes before Allah on the Day of Resurrection, 
he will have no good actions at a time when he will 
be mo& in need of them. In this manner, Allah ex¬ 
plains to you what will be of benefit to you in this 
world and the next, so that you may reflect. 

(j| O you who have faith in Allah and follow His 
Messenger, spend from the pure, wholesome wealth 
that you have earned and from the produce that we 
have taken out for you from the ground. Do not look for that which is inferior to spend, because if it was given to you, 
you would not take it willingly because of its poor quality. How, then, can you be satisfied with offering Allah that which 
you would not accept for yourselves? Know that Allah is no need of your spending and He is praised in His essence and 
actions. 

In the next verse, after in&ructing them to spend that which is pure, Allah warns them of Satan’s plots and whisperings: 
{j| Satan makes you afraid of poverty by encouraging you to be Clingy, and he invites you to commit sins. Allah, on the 
other hand, promises you forgiveness for your sins and much provision. Allah is very bountiful and He knows the con¬ 
dition of His servants. 

HI Allah grants the ability to whomever of His servants He wishes to be &eadfa& in their statements and actions. Anyone 
who is given this ability has been given much good. However, only those with sound minds, that seek enlightenment 
through His light, and guidance from His guidance, will pay attention and benefit from the signs of Allah. 

® Beneficial Points : 

1. The true believers in Allah are sure of His promise and reward: they spend their wealth without any fear or grief. 

2. It is Allah’s grace and favour that He blesses what is spent by the believers when it is done with sincerity. 

3. The believer trusts in Allah and pays no attention to the whisperings of Satan, who tries to stop him from spending 
by making him afraid of poverty and need. 

4. The biggest loser is the person who shows off his good actions, because the only thing he will receive as a reward is 
the praise of people. 


























'Zt'f _' »«" » a) J _" _'2' ^ ^ | 

o^>-^A- 33 i ^JLJaS (j^IA aj 

liAllj 0^0 J)\^^\ j j 


L~> 


(jij > 





j ^== = =l } \ lij 4J^ ‘^r3 

i-fljcJ \ £)£ ^Jr 9 5 -~-^t 


>-«» 


^ ** 


(jp Whatever you spend, no matter how little, for 
the pleasure of Allah, or any action that you prom¬ 
ise to do for Allah without having been required to 
do it, Allah knows of it and it will not be lo&. He 
will give you a great reward for it. 

Those who do wrong by not fulfilling their obliga¬ 
tions and overstepping Allah’s limits have no one 
to protect them againSt the punishment on the Day 
of Resurrection. 

dj| If you openly declare what you spend in charity, 
it is a good act. But if you keep it secret and give 
it to the poor in private, this is better as it indicates 
sincerity. Charity that is given sincerely becomes 
the means of sins being covered up and forgiven. 

Allah knows what you do and nothing from your 
circumstances is hidden from Him. 

|j) O Prophet, you are not responsible for making 
them believe in the truth and submitting to it: your 
duty is to guide them to the truth and explain it to 
them. It is only Allah Who can bring them to the 
truth; and He guides whomever He wishes. 

The benefit of any good you spend comes back to 
you; Allah is in no need of it. So, let your spending 
be only for Allah’s sake: true believers 
for Allah’s pleasure. You will receive 
ward for any good you spend, no matter how little, 
because Allah does not wrong anyone. 

After mentioning spending in His path and calling 
the believers towards it, in the next verse Allah ex¬ 
plains the avenues for such spending: 

(j| You should spend on those poor people who, 
because they are busy striving in Allah’s path, are 
unable to travel to earn a living. Due to their not 
asking, a person that is unaware will think that they are not in need. However, the person who knows will recognise them 
by the signs that are apparent on their body and clothing. They are unlike other poor persons who beg persistently. Allah 
knows of any good or wealth you spend and He will give you a great reward for it. 

@ Those who spend their wealth for Allah’s sake at night and during the day, secretly and openly, without showing off or 
looking for fame, will have their reward from their Lord on the Day of Resurrection. As a favour and blessing from Allah, 
they will have no fear of what the future holds, nor any sadness over what they missed out on in the world. 

® Beneficial Points : 

1. Whatever the believers spend is not hidden from Allah: He knows of it and will reward those who are sincere with the 
best reward. 

2. If a believer is sincere in his spending and charity, there is no harm if he reveals it or hides it, even though hiding it 
carries greater reward. 

3. The believers are called to pay attention to those who are in need but are too dignified to reveal this to people. 

4. The verse shows that one should always spend in Allah’s path and that Allah promises that this carries great reward in 
this world and the Afterlife. 


“ ^ - & ^ ^.. w ' - - 























a J 


tv 




^P&?tgi 3 g 3 u 3 j 4 s 

- — - ^ - o ^ _ -'' / ^ 



o^L^aiC^l>cLl^'\ 
j Sj>^jJ*-&J J^yi*>>-\jL^J a^=^\ Vy\X3 

4ji\ j_«£>\ U^°\ fr '"•'> i3\ lX>\j^ (w) J 

\jU*-a>3 ^^.ui?j 4 ? | 

lAj^j^s> jL^p ol5 U dr?.'— 

ljl £-^ =i’ 4^(^) '^Jadlda^^ >-^= == 4j^ j 

>^=sL^-is^ A^ai oli i 

(JIaj 0 


After Allah has encouraged spending in His path as 
a form of cooperation between Muslims, He warns 
them from becoming involved in the opposite - 
which is usury -and He says: 

|f| Those who take interest will rise from their 
graves on the Day of Resurrection like a person 
who is afflicted by Satan: they will &and up from 
their graves and then fall like a person who is epi¬ 
leptic. This is because they made usury permissible 
and made no distinction between usury and that 
which Allah has permitted in terms of profit earned 
through sales transactions. They claimed, ‘Sale is 
like usury’, meaning that both are lawful since both 
lead to an increase in wealth. Allah refutes their 
comparison and explains that He has permitted 
sale because of the general and specific benefit it 
contains, and He has prohibited usury because it is 
oppressive and abusive of people’s wealth. 

The person who &ops taking usury, and repents 
from his sin, after receiving Allah’s instruction 
prohibiting it and warning him againSt it, may keep 
the usury that he received in the paSt, without any 
sin. Then, whatever he does from then on, Allah 
will judge it. Whoever returns to taking usury after 
knowing of the prohibition deserves to enter the fire 
of Hell and to remain there eternally. 

The reference to remaining in the fire of Hell eter¬ 
nally in relation to those that believe in Allah’s 
Oneness is an indication of a long period of time; 
for only disbelievers will actually remain eternally 
in the fire of Hell. 

Since Allah mentioned spending in His path and 
taking usury, He explains the different end result 

of each, by saying: 

(j| Allah wipes out usury either by actually destroying it or by removing His blessing. Yet He increases charity and makes 
it grow by multiplying its reward by ten times up to seven hundred times or even more, and blesses those that give charity 
from their wealth. Allah does not love a Stubborn disbeliever who considers the prohibited as lawful and persists in sins. 
(j| Those who have faith in Allah, follow His Messenger, do good actions, fulfil their prayers in a complete manner and 
give Zakat to those deserving it, they shall receive their reward from their Lord and shall not have any fear for their future 
nor any grief over anything they missed in the worldly life. 

{H O you who have faith in Allah and follow His Messenger, fear Allah by fulfilling His instructions and avoiding His 
prohibitions, and do not demand any usury owed to you that remains with people, if you truly have faith in Allah and in 
His prohibitions. 

(Sj| If you do not obey the sacred law, then be aware and certain of war with Allah and His Messenger. If you repent to 
Allah and leave usury, then you can keep the initial amount that you had given as a loan from your capital, in a manner 
that does not wrong anyone by taking more than your initial capital and does not wrong you by making you receive less 
than it. |§| If the person from whom you demand your debt is in hard times and is unable to repay the debt, then refrain 
from asking until he is able to obtain money and then pay the debt. And to give charity to him by not demanding the debt 
or giving up a part of it is better for you, if you knew its worth in the sight of Allah. (jf| Fear the punishment of a day 
in which you all will be returned to Allah and you will have to &and before Him. Then every person will be given the 
reward of any good or evil action he did. They will not be wronged by receiving a reward less than their good actions or 
a punishment more than their evil actions. 

® Beneficial Points : 

1. One of the most serious major sins is usury. For this reason, Allah has warned of war from Him and His Messenger for 
the person who takes usury. 

2. Obeying the sacred law of commercial transactions brings blessings and growth. 

3. It is virtuous to be patient with a person in financial difficulty and to make things easy for him by giving up the debt 
in part or in full. 


















tA 


■ipiiySJ 


dc^fy^i ^jJ=^jZ.J£3' 



jidiC^3 atiaai^=C^5 d 4?i 

.li J^rL) ^(j£^-J l£^ ^ 

£^LZJ^J)\ \jl**^^\ I^Jl^ ^JAp k£^i\ (jl^== O^ 

<J^£s^ i? -X^iU^»\^ \x^ \jj O^ 

J O^ ^=4^3 o$ 


|f| O you who have faith in Allah and follow His 
Messenger, when you enter a transaction that in¬ 
volves a debt - such as when you give a loan to one 
another for a fixed period -then write it down. The 
person who is able to write should write it down 
fairly and in accordance with the sacred law, and 
should not refuse to write down the debt in accord¬ 
ance with what Allah has taught him about writing 
justly. He should write what is dictated by the per¬ 
son against whom the right is so that it serves as an 
acknowledgement from him. He should be mindful 
of Allah and not reduce anything from the value or 
description of the debt. 

If the debtor is not experienced in undertaking 
transactions, young, insane or is not able to dictate 
due to being mute or for some other reason, then his 
authoritative guardian should dictate with fairness. 

Also, call two sane and upright men as witnesses. If 
two men are not found, then call one man and two 
women whose religion and honesty you are satis¬ 
fied with, so that if one of the women forgets, the 
other can remind her. The witness should not refuse 
to be a witness to a debt and mu£t testify if required. 

Do not be lazy to write down the debt, no matter 
how small the amount, as this is more ju^t in Allah’s 
law, more reliable as evidence and more likely to 
remove any doubt in the type, amount or period of 
the debt. However, if the transaction is for an item 
that is present in exchange for a spot price there is 
no harm in not writing down, since there is no need 
to do so. 

Calling witnesses is legislated so that disputes do 
not arise. It is unlawful to cause any harm to the 
witnesses or the ones who write; nor may they cause any harm to those who request them to write or &and witness. If 
anyone causes harm, he is going against Allah’s sacred law. 

O people of faith, be mindful of Allah by fulfilling His instructions and avoiding His prohibitions. Allah will teach you 
what is beSt for you in this world and the Afterlife. Allah knows everything and nothing is hidden from Him. 

® Beneficial Points : 

1. Debts and all commercial transactions should be recorded to prevent any disagreement or dispute. 

2. Transactions involving debt and all types of leases must have fixed periods. 

3. The sacred law commands guardianship over those who are not able to look after their affairs due to being disabled, 
weak-minded or minors. 

4. There should be witnesses to acknowledgments of debts and rights. 

5. The best and most just way to write is to use the correct phrases and words relevant to the transaction. 

6. No one should be harmed when recording debts and rights by the holders of such rights or those that record or 
witness them. 


s i^ ^ 























^3\ ^jLgojbS^i^fe A^jL5)j 

_. A»^ _ 

iLii ^ lli^ ^ j = C ^<L^i 

-4| \ 1\-^ ^1 ^ ^ 'T^vl ^ 

jJ* \3^^Aj^jj {^y^-Xc^ clA 5 . c3_^-J2j )s ^ A>-^L^ 

| J|4^0J^\i!d^^^^l5\^ 

U5j HUfi^-Ijl lSv_^ \I5j 

4^S\X^ U IsLi-SJS 

3 jl 


(jp If you are travelling and do not find anyone who 
can write down the debt for you, then the debtor can 
give a property to the creditor as a security for his 
right until the debt is paid. 

If you tru& one another, it is not necessary to write 
the debt down, call witnesses or give a promise. In 
such cases, the debt will be the responsibility of the 
debtor, which he mu& fulfil and be mindful of Allah 
regarding it by not denying it later. If he later denies 
it, then the person who was present at the time of 
the transaction mu& give evidence and may not 
hide it. If anyone should hide evidence, it indicates 
that his heart is sinful. Allah knows what you do, 
nothing is hidden from Him and He will reward you 
for your actions. 

|§| To Allah belongs everything that is in the 
heavens and earth: He created, owns and controls 
all of it. Whether you show or hide what is in your 
hearts, Allah knows about it and will call you to 
account for it. Then He will forgive whomever He 
wishes out of His grace and mercy, and He will 
punish whomever He wishes out of His wisdom 
and justice. Allah is able to do all things. 

|f| The Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him) 
believes in everything that was revealed to him by 
his Lord, as do the believers. All of them believe in 
Allah, all His angels, all His books that He revealed 
to the various prophets and all His messengers that 
He sent. They believe in such messengers without 
making any distinction between them. They say, 
‘We have heard your instructions and prohibitions, 
and we obey You by following Your instructions 
and leaving Your prohibitions. We ask You to for¬ 


give us, O Lord, for in all our matters we return to You alone’. 

HI Allah only burdens a person with actions that he is able to do. Allah’s religion is based on ease and not difficulty. If 
any person does good, he will receive the reward for it in full. If any person does evil, he will receive the punishment for 
the sin he committed and no one will carry it for him. The Messenger and the believers said, ‘O Lord, do not punish us 
if we forget or make a mistake in doing something or saying something unintentionally. O Lord, do not burden us with 
that which is difficult for us and which we are unable to do as you had tasked those before us who were punished for their 
wrongs. Do not give us such instructions and prohibitions which are difficult for us and which we are unable to fulfil. 
By Your grace, overlook our sins, forgive us and have mercy on us. You are our guardian and helper, so give us victory 
over the disbelievers’. 

^ Beneficial Points : 

1. A promise should to be taken to secure rights if it is not possible to record them, unless the contracting parties trust 
one another. 

2. It is forbidden to hide evidence; and the person who does so is sinful. 

3. Allah’s knowledge and awareness of His creation is perfect. He is completely able to call them to account for their 
actions. 

4. The verses describe the essentials of faith and explain their fundamentals. 

5. This religion is based on ease and removal of harm and difficulty from people. Allah only burdens people with what 
they are able to do, and will not make them accountable for what they cannot do. 


















The Family of ‘Imran (Surah A1 ‘Imran) 

4*} Themes of the Surah: 

This Surah is about remaining firm on Islam after it 
has been perfectly explained; and it aims to dispel 
the doubts of the People of the Scripture, especially 
the Christians. 

® Explanation: 

It is so-named because of the mention of the family 
of ‘Imran in verse 33. 

(J) Alif Lam Mini - the placement of such let¬ 
ters has been discussed at the beginning of Surah 
Al-Baqarah. They indicate the inability of the Ar¬ 
abs to bring a Qur’an like this one despite the fact 
that it is composed of letters similar to the ones at 
the beginning of this Surah, which also form the 
parts of their own speech. 

(jj Allah is the One Who alone deserves to be wor¬ 
shipped. He is the One Who lives perfectly without 
any death or deficiency. He exists by Himself and 
is not in need of any of His creation. The creation 
only exists through Him and is always in need of 
Him. 

He has revealed to you, O Prophet, the Qur’an 
with true stories and just laws that are in agreement 
with the previous divine books; and there is no con¬ 
tradiction between all these divine books. Before 
revealing the Qur’an to you. He revealed the Torah 
to Moses and the Gospel to Jesus. 

@ All of these divine books contained guidance 
and directed people to the best of this world and the 
Afterlife. He revealed the Criterion to differentiate 
between truth and falsehood, and between guidance 
and misguidance. Disbelievers in the verses Allah has revealed to you will receive a severe punishment. Allah is Mighty 
and nothing can overpower Him. He is also able to take retribution from those who reject His messengers and go against 
His instruction. @ Nothing in the earth or heaven is hidden from Allah. He knows everything, whether it is open or hid¬ 
den. {jp He is the One Who creates you in different forms in the wombs of your mothers, as He wills: as male and female, 
handsome and ugly, black and white. There is no one worthy of being worshipped with love and reverence besides Him. 
He is Mighty and cannot be overpowered. He is Wise in His planning and legislation. @ O Prophet, He is the One Who 
revealed to you the Qur’an, which contains verses with clear and unambiguous meaning, and these represent the majority 
of the Book and are the reference point when there is disagreement. It also contains other verses that may have more 
than one meaning and are puzzling for most people. Those who seek other than the truth leave the clear verses and focus 
on the unclear ones, trying to create doubts and mislead people, and interpret them to suit their corrupt views. No one 
knows the true meaning of such verses besides Allah. Those who are firm in knowledge say, ‘We have faith in the entire 
Qur’an because it is all from Allah’. They interpret the unclear verses according to the clear ones. Only those who have 
sound minds pay attention to this. @ The ones firm in knowledge say, ‘O Lord, do not let our hearts move away from the 
truth after you have shown it to us. Save us from what happened to those who moved away from the truth. Give us, from 
Your vast mercy, that which will guide our hearts and protect us from misguidance. Our Lord, You are the One who gives 
much’. (0) Our Lord, You are going to call all people back to You: to hold them to account on a day in which there is no 
doubt. Our Lord, You do not break promises. 

Beneficial Points : 

1. Allah has established proof against the creation and left them no excuse for disbelief by sending messengers and books 
to guide them to the truth and warn them against falsehood. 2. Allah’s knowledge is perfect and He knows everything 
about His creation. Nothing in the heavens or earth is hidden from Him, whether it is open or hidden. 3. One of the princi¬ 
ples of the people of faith who are firm in knowledge is that they interpret the unclear verses by referring to the clear ones. 
4. A person should pray to Allah for firmness on the truth and for guidance, especially at the time of trouble and disagree¬ 
ments amongst the people. 



























0\ 






•i « 


•jj j\; 

Jjl ius\ &2AL>\g j^=>. J~-&& (jto J J$j ^L^>s 

!#&- cSJ&j i^i Jo^s | 

Jj ^4'i & 

I K 

.' ^ Of ‘-° ‘-°T a (1*1 j: "^b c) "4 U S? 

$*®^\zK'c>^A j^'<u&£; Sfesft | 

>-4i) -Ot-V^-^ Oj^- ^£=== 1^ 



0 ,A^4 \^r^0 3 - 4ji\55^-4 ^ 



@ The wealth and children of the disbelievers in 
Allah and His Messenger will not protect them 
from Allah’s punishment in this world nor in the 
Afterlife. Such disbelievers will be the fuel with 
which Hell will be lit on the Day of Resurrection. 
@ The case of these disbelievers is like that of the 
people of Pharaoh, and those before them who dis¬ 
believed in Allah and denied His signs. As a result, 
Allah punished them for their sins - their wealth 
and children did not benefit them. Allah is severe 
in punishing those who disbelieve in Him and His 
signs. 

@ O Messenger, say to those who disbelieve, no 
matter what their religion, ‘The believers will de¬ 
feat you and you will die as disbelievers. Allah will 
then gather you in the fire of Hell. What an evil 
resting place it will be for you!’ 

@ There was a clear sign and lesson in the two 
groups that met to fight in the Battle of Badr. One 
group was made up of believers, and this was the 
Prophet (peace be upon him) and his Companions: 
they were fighting for Allah’s sake and in order to 
raise His Word against the word of those who dis¬ 
believe. The other group consisted of the disbeliev¬ 
ers of Makkah, who had come out in pride and for 
show. 

The believers actually saw the disbelievers as be¬ 
ing double their real number; but Allah helped His 
allies. Allah gives His support to whomever He 
wishes. In that there is a lesson and a warning for 
those of insight to realize that the help of Allah can 
come to the believers even though they may be few 
in number; and that defeat can come to those on 


falsehood even though they may be great in number. 

@ Allah tells us that He has made the love of desirable things of this world attractive to people in order to test them. 
These desirable things include women, children, wealth (in the form of gold and silver) that is overflowing and piled up, 
beautiful trained horses, livestock (such as camels, cows and sheep), as well as farmlands - all of which is the enjoyment 
of the life of the world which lasts only for a short while. A believer should not become attached to these things as Allah 
has kept the best place of return for him: the Paradise that is as wide as the heavens and the earth. 

Since the pleasures of the world will come to an end, Allah tells us in the next verse about that which is better: 

@ O Messenger, say: Shall I tell you about something better than those desirable things? Those who are mindful of Allah 
by fulfilling His commands and avoiding His prohibitions will have gardens with trees and palaces overlooking flowing 
streams in which they will live eternally. They will also have wives who will be free from any defects in their form or 
character. In addition, they will gain the pleasure of Allah, and Allah will never be angry with them. Allah sees the actions 
of His servants, nothing is hidden from Him and He will recompense them for what they do. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. A disbeliever’s wealth and children will be of no use to him on the Day of Resurrection against the punishment of 
Allah. 

2. Victory, in reality, is not dependent on numbers and preparation, but on Allah’s assistance and support. 

3. Allah has made various forms of desirable things of the world attractive as a test for people. He knows those who 
observe His limits from those who overstep them. 

4. All the enjoyment and pleasures of the world are only for a little while, and cannot be compared to the eternal bliss of 
the Afterlife. 



















i\jI*-5^L_k_cAd I 

ilrc^ij uj^.^4 3 ^ b o^r^ \ ^) _^LSl \ q>\ AcA53._j | 

Oiii: jf, 

qsijjtiiib 



s ^= ^\ \j>j\ eJaJci>-\ UJJLL^I \ 4j^\ Jjx. 



@ The people of Paradise are the ones who say 
in their prayers, ‘Our Lord, we have faith in You 
and in that which You revealed to Your messengers; 
and we have followed Your sacred law. So, forgive 
the sins we have committed and protect us from the 
punishment of the fire of Hell’. 

@ They are the ones who are patient in doing good 
actions, leaving bad actions and in the face of ca¬ 
lamity; truthful in their words and actions; fulfil Al¬ 
lah’s sacred law completely; spend their wealth in 
Allah’s path; and ask for forgiveness in the last part 
of the night when prayers are most likely accepted 
and when hearts are not distracted. 

@ Allah testifies that He alone is worthy of wor¬ 
ship based on the legislative and universal signs 
indicating His divinity. The angels and people of < 
knowledge also testify to this, by declaring and 
calling to His Oneness. They testified to the great¬ 
est thing anyone can testify to; the absolute right 
of Allah to be worshipped, and the perfect justice 
in His creation and sacred law. This is the greatest 
thing that anyone can testify to. There is no Allah 
but Him, the Mighty who can never be overpow¬ 
ered and the one who is Wise in His creation, plan¬ 
ning and legislation. 

The acceptable path in Allah’s sight is Islam, the 
path of surrendering: devotion of all good actions 
to Allah alone, submission to Him in servitude and 
acceptance of all messengers, including the final 
messenger Muhammad (peace be upon him) with 
whom revelations came to an end, and after whom 
no sacred laws will remain valid except his. 

The Jews and Christians only split up into various 
groups and sects, after evidence was established against them in the form of knowledge that had come to them, because 
of envy and greed for the world. Yet for whoever denies the verses of Allah revealed to His Messenger, Allah is quick in 
taking to account those who disbelieve in Him and His messengers. 

@ If they argue with you, O Messenger, about the truth that has been revealed to you, then say to them in reply, T and the 
believers who follow me have submitted to Allah’. Also, say, O Messenger, to the People of the Scripture and the idola¬ 
ters, ‘Do you submit to Allah sincerely, following what I have brought?’ If they submit to Allah and follow your sacred 
law, then they are on the path of guidance. If they turn away from Islam, then your duty is only to give your message to 
them; then Allah will decide about them. He watches His servants and will reward them according to their actions. 

@ Those who disbelieve in Allah’s signs, which show that He alone is the Lord and the One worthy of being worshipped, 
kill His prophets wrongly due to hatred, and kill those who call for justice by commanding good and forbidding evil - 
give these murderous disbelievers news of a painful punishment. 

@ The actions of those who do such things are wasted and will not be of any benefit to them, neither in this world nor 
the Afterlife, due to their lack of faith. There will be no one to protect them from the punishment. 

® Beneficial Points : 

1. The greatest thing that will wipe out sins and save a person from the punishment of the fire of Hell is faith in Allah and 
following what the Messenger (peace be upon him) brought. 

2. The greatest testimony and reality is that Allah is the only One to be worshipped. For this reason, Allah Himself testi¬ 
fies to this, as do His angels and the people of knowledge. 

3. The religion of Islam brought by the Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him) is the true religion which Allah has sent 
as His final message: no other religion is acceptable to Him. 


£^3^5 3 I 





















\ \ Cft^r^ \&J>\ CS$ ciljpji ^ 

ObjJ^Jtil^ljj^ \ <j) \j)\S J^&-> \j di^i 

i *'‘"y 



(@ O Prophet, did you not see the Jews who 
were given knowledge of the Torah proving your 
prophethood? When they are called to refer to 
the book of Allah, the Torah, so that it can decide 
about what they differ in, a group of their scholars 
and leaders turn away, ignoring the judgement of 
the Torah because it does not agree with their de¬ 
sires. The right thing for them to have done, having 
claimed that they follow the Torah, is to accept its 
judgement without hesitation. 

@ They turned away from the truth and ignored it 
because they used to think that the fire of Hell will 
only touch them for a few days and they will then 
enter Paradise. This belief deceived them and made 
them bold against Allah and His religion. 

@ What will be their state and how much will they 
regret? It will be incredibly terrible when I gather 
them to give account on the Day of Resurrection, 
in which there is no doubt. Every person will be 
given the reward of his actions according to what 
he deserves, without there being any oppression by 
a reduction in good actions or an increase in evil 
actions. 

C§S) O Prophet, say in praise of your Lord and in 
declaration of His greatness: Allah, to You belongs 
all authority in this world and the Afterlife. You 
give authority to whomever of Your creation You 
wish, and remove it from whomever of Your crea¬ 
tion You wish. You give honour to whomever You 
wish, and You disgrace whomever You wish. All of 
this is done according to Your wisdom and justice. 
All good lies only in Your hand. You have power 
over everything. 

@ A display of Your power is that You cause the night to become longer by making it enter into the day, and You cause 
the day to become longer by entering it into the night. You bring out the living from the dead - as in a believer from a 
disbeliever and crops from seed - and You bring out the dead from the living - as in a disbeliever from a believer and a 
chick from an egg. You give provision to whomever You wish, in abundance without any limit or count. 

{J) O believers, do not take disbelievers as friends that you love and support instead of other believers: whoever does this 
will never be helped by Allah in any way. However, if you are under their authority and you fear for your lives, then there 
is no harm if you avoid their harm by being nice to them in your speech and actions on the outside, whilst hating them 
inside. Allah warns you of Himself, so fear Him and do not become the subject of His anger by committing sins. All men 
will return to Allah alone on the Day of Resurrection for Him to reward them for their actions. 

jj) Say, O Prophet: Whether you hide within your hearts that which Allah has forbidden, such as befriending the disbe¬ 
lievers, or you reveal the same, Allah knows about it. Nothing is hidden from Him. He knows whatever is in the heavens 
and the earth. He has power over everything and nothing is outside His ability. 

® Beneficial Points : 

1. Guidance and success is only from Allah. Even if a very knowledgeable person reaches the highest of positions, it will 
be of no benefit to him without Allah’s grace. 

2. Authority belongs to Allah: He is the One Who gives and holds back, and the One Who gives honour and disgrace. All 
matters rest with Him, so no one else should be asked for anything. 

3. It is necessary to befriend believers and to leave disbelievers. 


Js (ft) ^ ^jXmA* J \±JL> 

0,/uS 
























<ii\ o liy $ A-44 V-^ 45 j iUju 


j Jyj-C- ^^ ===4jiJoj 

2oji 0 

T^ ^.-jf ^ < i^- 


6j 


v-i 


- •' ' % I 




ilff^cS £tt\j l£>\ \£k^>J <A\3 j 


@ On the Day of Resurrection every person will 
find the good that he did in front of him, without 
any deficiency. Those who did bad will wish that 
there was a great distance between them and their 
bad actions - but shall a desire will be worthless! 

Allah warns you of Himself, so do not become the 
subject of His anger by committing sins. Allah is 
kind to His servants and therefore gives them this 
warning. 

@> O Prophet, say: If you really love Allah, then 
follow what I have brought, on the inside and the 
outside. By doing this, you will gain Allah’s love 
and He will forgive your sins. Allah is Forgiving 
and Merciful to those who repent to Him. 

{§} O Prophet, say: Follow Allah and His Messen¬ 
ger by fulfilling His instructions and avoiding His 
prohibitions. If they turn away from the command, 
then know that Allah does not love the disbelievers 
who go against His sacred law and the instructions 
of His Messenger. 

Allah honoured Adam (peace be upon him), by 
making the angels prostrate before him; Noah, by 
making him the first messenger to the people of the 
earth; the family of Abraham, by placing propheth- 
ood in his children; and the family of‘Imran, the fa¬ 
ther of Mary - which is a reference to Jesus (peace 
be upon him). He selected all of them and preferred 
them over all the people of their time. 

@ These prophets and their followers were all part 
of the same family: declaring Allah’s Oneness and 
doing good. They passed on noble character and * 
virtues to one another. Allah hears the statements of 
His servants and knows their actions; and therefore 
chooses whomever He wills. 

Remember, O Messenger, when the wife of ‘Imran, the mother of Mary, said: O Lord, I have made it a duty on myself 
to fully dedicate my unborn child to You, to worship You and Your House, so accept this act from me. You are the One 
who hears my prayer and knows my intention. 

When she reached the end of her pregnancy and gave birth she was astonished - as she had hoped for a boy - and 
she said, ‘O Lord, I have given birth to a girl’. Allah knows what she gave birth to. Of course, a girl does not have the 
same strength and form as a boy that she had hoped for. She said, ‘I have named her Mary and I ask for Your mercy in 
protecting her and her children from the rejected Satan’. 

(jp Allah graciously accepted the dedication and brought her up well. He made the hearts of His pious servants incline 
caringly to her and put her in the care of the Prophet Zachariah. Whenever Zachariah would enter her place of worship he 
would find wholesome food there. So, he asked her, ‘O Mary, where did you get this food from?’ She replied, ‘This food 
is from Allah. Allah gives to whomever He wishes in abundance without account’. 

® Beneficial Points : 

1. Allah’s great status and the harshness of His punishment will make any sensible person be mindful of going against 
His sacred law. 

2. The proof of true love for Allah and His Messenger is following the instructions and prohibitions of the sacred law. 
The claim of love without proof is weak. 

3. Through His wisdom and mercy, Allah chooses whomever of His servants He wishes for prophethood and prophetic 
miracles. 



Al * Imran 54 Part 3 















] ArA J'” sjA 


oo 



KrL> 


©When Zachariah saw the food that Allah was mi¬ 
raculously giving to Mary, he became hopeful that 
Allah would give him a child despite being very old 
and his wife being unable to bear children. He said: 
O Lord, give me a good child. You hear the prayer 
of the person who prays to You and You know his 
condition. 

© The angels called out to him while he was stand¬ 
ing in prayer in his place of worship, saying: Allah 
gives you good news of a child to be born to you 
whose name will be John. He will confirm a word 
from Allah - which refers to Jesus, son of Mary, 
because he was specially created by a word from 
Allah. This child will be a leader of his people with 
his knowledge and worship. He will be innocent, 
keeping himself away from desires, including ap¬ 
proaching women. He will dedicate himself to wor¬ 
shipping His Lord and will also be a prophet from 
those who are righteous. 

@ When the angels gave him the good news about 
John, Zachariah said, ‘O Lord, how can I have a 
child after I have become old and my wife is unable 
to bear children?’ Allah replied to him that the ex¬ 
ample of the creation of John, in spite of his old age 
and his wife being barren, is like that of the creation 
of anything that Allah wishes to create, even though 
it is out of the ordinary. This is because Allah has 
power over everything and does whatever He wills 
in His wisdom and knowledge. 

Zachariah said: O Lord, give me a sign that my 
wife is pregnant. Allah said: The sign that you want 
is that you will not be able to speak for three days, 
except by indications, and this will not be because of any disability. So, remember Allah much and glorify Him at the end 
and beginning of the day. 

© Remember, O Messenger, when the angels said to Mary (peace be upon her): Allah has chosen you because of the 
praiseworthy qualities you have. He has purified you from all defects, and chosen you over all the other women of your 
time. 

© O Mary, stand for long periods in prayer, prostrate to your Lord and bow down with His righteous servants who bow 
down to Him. 


'xL=> 

J^'^3 


A1 ‘Imran 



© The story of Zachariah and Mary is one of the reports of [the Ghaib] which I reveal to you, O Messenger. You were not 
there with those scholars and worshippers when they argued about who was most entitled to raise Mary. They eventually 
decided to draw lots by throwing their pens, and the pen of Zachariah (peace be upon him) won. 

© Remember, O Messenger, when the angels said: O Mary, Allah gives you good news of a child who will be created 
without a father: merely by a word from Allah, such as ‘Be’, and he will become a child by Allah’s will. The name of this 
child will be the Messiah, Jesus, son of Mary. He will have a high rank in this world and the Afterlife and he will be one 
of those who are made close to Allah. 

® Beneficial Points : 

1. Allah takes special care of His friends by protecting them from anything bad and by answering their prayers. 

2. Mary has special virtue in Islam, as Allah had chosen her over all the other women, purified her from defects and 
blessed her. 

3. The greater the favour Allah gives to a person the more he has to be thankful. 

4. The sacred law accepts the drawing of lots when there is a dispute which cannot be resolved due to lack of any evidence 
or clues. 






















sjjj^i^j 2 X£=i4A5 0^=^iuAjoj 0 
02^5% ^ ss=i ^- £o j: <j? %5^sX?^ iil*i>41? 0 

lAr^J ( i^-jVj 4ji\ 4^^ £_$ 



:fl A 


>J OpiP'p,J$oJ^>-j y^==£&j{yz~ ji\ 


@> This child will miraculously speak to people 
when he is a small baby, as well as when he grows 
up and becomes a man. He will tell them what is 
best for them in their religious and worldly affairs. 

He will also be one of those who are righteous in 
their words and actions. 

@ Mary was surprised that she was to have a child 
without a husband and said in astonishment: How 
can I have a child when no man has come near me 
in a lawful or unlawful way? The angel said to her: 

Just as Allah will create a child for you without a 
father, He creates whatever He wishes even though 
it may be out of the ordinary. When Allah wishes 
for something, He says ‘Be’ and it is. Nothing can 
stop Him doing as He wills. 

@ Allah will teach him to say and do things cor¬ 
rectly; and He will teach him the Torah that He 
revealed to Moses (peace be upon him) and 
Gospel which He will reveal to him. 

@ Allah will make him a messenger to the Isra- } ^ ^ ■*. ^ ^ ^ ^ 

elites, instructing him to say to them: I am Allah’s 
messenger to you. I have brought to you a sign in 
dicating my prophethood: I will make the shape of 

a bird using clay, then I will breathe into it and it J 9 > l ^ \ t \ \ 

will become a living bird by Allah’s permission. I ^ 
will cure the one who was born blind, so that he 
will be able to see, and the leper who will recover 
from his illness; and I will bring the dead to life. I 
will do all of this with Allah’s permission. I will tell 
you about what you consume and what you hide in 
your homes. In all of these extraordinary things that 
I mentioned to you, which human beings cannot do, 
is a clear sign that I am Allah’s messenger to you, if 
you wish to have faith and to accept the proof. 

@ I have come to you to confirm the revelation of the Torah that was before me, and to make lawful some of that which 
was unlawful in the past: making things easy for you. I have brought to you a clear proof of the truthfulness of what I say, 
so be mindful of Allah by fulfilling His instructions and avoiding His prohibitions; and follow that which I call you to. 

Allah is my Lord and your Lord, and He is the only One that deserves to be followed and feared. So, worship Him 
alone. This worship of Allah and being mindful of Him that I instruct you to do is the straight path which has no crook¬ 
edness. 

(j§j) When Jesus realized that they were going to continue in their disbelief, he addressed the Israelites, saying, ‘Who will 
help me in calling towards Allah?’ His chosen followers said: We are the ones who will help Allah’s religion. We have 
faith in Allah and we follow you. Be a witness, O Jesus, that we submit to Allah by accepting His Oneness and following 
Him. 

<*} Beneficial Points : 

1. Allah was gracious to Mary and her son, the Messiah, by blessing them with many miracles. 

2. Writing is considered a noble skill, as Allah mentioned it before other things. 

3. Allah’s custom is that He supports His messengers with miracles which are beyond the capacity of human beings, 
indicating their truthfulness. 

4. Jesus came to make some of the laws of the Torah easy for the Israelites. 



r< ^ 99 ^ % \v ^ / 

' iX S £ iiAa 4X>\ 'l _ 


\ A1 ‘Imran 


56 

Part 3 1 





















Vj 


OV 


\ I^Ux^\xUjj 

=l L^jjl lg>~ 4^\j V^Caj (^) ciA^Ltit 

ii\ (^) 



>4^ 13 >-4^jscAi 

\ ULftwP 9 W~° \ g- J^Jjjl\ \jb\j (^) f Y^yA^fy*. 

j < ^L?iJ ^'- 5 AJaig- ^ ^ — =^ A^l 


^0V^.\ @ The disciples also said: Our Lord, we have be¬ 

lieved in the Gospel that you revealed and we have 
followed the messenger, Jesus (peace be upon him), 
so make us of those who are witnesses to the truth 
and who have faith in You and Your messengers. 
@ The disbelievers from the Israelites plotted to 
kill Jesus (peace be upon him), so Allah planned 
to leave them in their misguidance; and He made 
another person resemble Jesus (peace be upon him) 
on the occasion when they actually tried to murder 
him. Allah is the best plotter, because there can be 
nothing more severe than His plot against His en¬ 
emies. 

@ Allah also planned against them by saying to Je¬ 
sus: O Jesus, I will take you away alive, raise your 
body and soul to Me, rid you of the filth of those 
who disbelieved you and distance you from them. 
I will make those who follow you part of the true 
religion, which includes acceptance of Muhammad 
(peace be upon him); and they will have greater 
proof and might over those who disbelieve you 
until the Day of Resurrection. Then to Me alone 
will be your return on the Day of Resurrection and 
I will pass true judgement between you regarding 
your differences. 

@ As for those who disbelieved you and the truth 
you brought to them, I will punish them severely in 
the world by making them suffer being killed, im¬ 
prisoned and disgraced; and in the Afterlife, I will 
punish them in the fire of Hell. They will have no 
one to help them against the punishment. 

(jp As for those who had faith in you and the truth 
that you brought to them, and did good actions 
(such as prayer, charity, fasting, keeping family relations, etc.), then Allah will give them the reward of their actions in 
full without any reduction. 

This refers to the followers of the Messiah before the coming of the Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him), whose 
coming was confirmed by the Messiah himself. 

Allah does not love those who do wrong and the greatest wrong is to ascribe partners to Allah and to disbelieve His 
messengers. 

(Sj) This account of Jesus which is recited to you is a clear sign indicating the truth of what was revealed to you. It is a 
perfect message for those who are mindful of Allah, as it contains nothing false. 

(j|) With Allah, the example of the creation of Jesus (peace be upon him) is like the creation of Adam, who was born from 
dust without a father or mother. Allah simply said to him: Become a man. And he became as Allah willed. 

How do you then assume that Jesus is a Allah on the basis that he has no father when you accept that Adam is human 
despite his having no father or mother? 

@ The undoubtable truth about Jesus is that which was revealed to you by your Lord, so do not be one of those who doubt 
and are unsure. Instead, be firm on the truth that you have. 

@ If anyone of the Christians disputes with you, O Messenger, regarding the matter of Jesus, and claims that he was not 
Allah’s servant after the correct knowledge has come to you, then say to them, ‘Come, let us call our sons and your sons, 
our women and your women, ourselves and yourselves; and let us gather together and then pray to Allah to send down 
His curse on those of us who are lying’. 

® Beneficial Points : 

1. The testimony that is acceptable and of use is that which is true and based on knowledge. 

2. There is an explanation of the correct belief regarding Jesus (peace be upon him), which counters those that are mis¬ 
guided regarding him. 

3. Allah, with His perfect power, acts against those who plot against His religion and His friends by manoeuvring against 
them. 

4. The sacred law accepts that two disputants may invoke the curse of Allah on one another, in the manner described. 


\0 




J > 




A1 ‘Imran 


57 

























OA 




Oj (^) \JtJ=^^j£^\ 
lx_uu ^^^SX^====> L*3 JS {^) 




I?-k _4 \j^y^ °^y ^ oj ^ <jl* tS\jj\ U^o Ucia^o | 

OjL^e*^\ 2o Ai jj^SS ^ \j Soj^i\ l^J 1|^ 

jqj Ua ( ^ ) ^ 

>23j ^ ^--= d (J^a) I 


@ That which has been mentioned to you about Je¬ 
sus (peace be upon him) is the true tale that contains 
no lie or doubt. There is no one worthy of worship 
besides Allah alone. Allah is Mighty in His authori¬ 
ty and Wise in His planning and instruction. 

@ If they turn away from what you have brought 
and do not follow you, then it is because they are 
corrupt. Allah knows those who cause corruption 
in the earth and He will recompense them for that. 

(jp Say, O Messenger: O Jews and Christians, Peo¬ 
ple of the Scripture, come let us unite on a fair word 
in which we are all equal: that we worship Allah 
alone and we do not worship anyone besides Him, 
no matter what his rank and no matter how high is 
his status; and that we do not take one another as 
lords to be worshipped and followed besides Allah. 
If they turn away from the truth and fairness that 
you call them towards, then, O believers, say to 
them: Bear witness that we have surrendered to Al¬ 
lah and are obedient to Him. 

(j§S) O People of the Scripture, why do you dispute 
about the belief of Abraham? The Jews claimed that 
he was a Jew and the Christians claimed he was 
a Christian. You know very well that Judaism and 
Christianity appeared a long time after him. Can 
you not see the falseness of your statement and the 
error of your claim? 

@ You, People of the Scripture, argued without 
knowledge with the Prophet (peace be upon him) 
about your religion and about what was revealed 
to you. Why, then, do you dispute about Abraham 


Al ‘Imran 

and his religion, which you do not know, as it is not in your book and your prophets did not discuss it? Allah knows the 
reality of things and you do not know. 

@ Abraham was not a Jew or Christian in belief, but he was opposed to all false religions and obedient to Allah alone. 
He was also not one of those who ascribe partners to Allah - contrary to the idolaters of the Arabs, who claim to follow 
his belief. 

(jfl The people who are most entitled to claim a link to Abraham are those who followed him in his time, as well as this 
Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him) and those who have faith in him from this nation. Allah helps and protects the 
believers. 


(^3\ ay£*z\ H 
\j 4J ^\\ jpt 


(j|) The scholars of the Jews and the Christians desire to mislead you, O believers, away from the truth that Allah has 
guided you to. Yet they only mislead themselves because their attempt to mislead the believers only increases their mis¬ 
guidance, and they do not know the consequence of their actions. 

(jj) O People of the Scripture, Jews and Christians, why do you disbelieve Allah’s words which were sent down to you 
and the clear indication they contain of the prophethood of Muhammad (peace be upon him), whilst you are witness to 
the fact that it is the truth contained in your books? 

® Beneficial Points : 

1. All divine messages agreed on one upright saying: to declare Allah’s Oneness and to forbid associating partners with 
Him. 

2. It is important to know history as it is sometimes used as a proof to refute those that make false claims. 

3. The people who are most entitled to belong to Abraham are those who follow his belief and tenets of faith. A mere 
claim to belong to him is of no use if a person goes against him. 

4. The verses indicate that the disbelievers from the People of the Scripture are keen to mislead the believers of this nation 
because of their envy. 



































{j5 O People of the Scripture, why do you mix the 
truth contained in your books with falsehood from 
yourselves? Why do you hide the truth and guid¬ 
ance contained in your book, such as the truthful¬ 
ness of the prophethood of Muhammad (peace be 
upon him), when you know what is true and what 
is false? 

@ A group of Jewish scholars said: On the outside, 
accept the Qur’an which was revealed to the be¬ 
lievers at the beginning of the day and then reject 
it at the end of the day, so that, after seeing this, 
they begin to have doubts about their religion and 
turn back from it saying, ‘These people know better 
about Allah’s Book and they have turned back’. 
@ They also said: Do not believe or accept anyone 
unless he is a Jew and follows your religion. Say, 
O Messenger: Guidance to the truth is the Guid¬ 
ance of Allah; not the disbelief and stubbornness 
that you display, fearing that anyone else could be 
given a bounty similar to what you were given, or 
that they would argue with you before your Lord if 
you acknowledged what was revealed to them. Say, 
O Messenger: Bounty is in Allah’s Hand and He 
gives it to whomever of His servants He wills: His 
bounty is not restricted to any one nation. Allah is 
embracing and He knows who is deserving. 

(Sjj He selects whomever of His creation He wishes 
to receive His mercy and blesses them with guid¬ 
ance, prophethood and numerous favours. Allah’s 
bounty is great and has no limit. 

@ There are some People of the Scripture who, if 
you hand over a large amount of wealth, will hon¬ 
our the trust. 

On the other hand, there are some of them who, if you trust them with a small amount, will not return the trust unless 
you persistently demand it from them. That is because they wrongly claim that there is no sin on them for any crime they 
commit against the Arabs or if they consume the wealth of the Arabs, since Allah has permitted that for them. They say 
such lies knowing that it is a false attribution to Allah. 

@ It is not as they claimed: in fact, there is a sin on them. However, if anyone fulfils his promise to Allah to have faith 
in Him and His Messenger, as well as his promise to people to honour their trusts, and is mindful of Allah by fulfilling 
His instructions and avoiding His prohibitions, then Allah loves those who are mindful of Him and will give them the 
best reward. 

{J)) Those who take a small amount of this world in exchange of Allah’s advice to them to follow His revelation and 
His messengers, and in exchange of the oaths they took to fulfil Allah’s pledge, will have no share in the reward of the 
Afterlife. Allah will not speak kindly to them and will not look at them mercifully on the Day of Resurrection. They will 
receive a painful punishment. 

® Beneficial Points : 

1. Some of the scholars of the People of the Scripture deceive the followers of their religion and do not show them the 
truth contained in their books which was brought by their prophets. 

2. Allah is the Giver and the Bountiful. He gives whomever He wishes through His grace, and He withholds from whom¬ 
ever He wishes through His justice and wisdom. His grace can only be gained by following Him. 

3. The People of the Scripture are not all the same with respect to their honesty and trustworthiness: there are some of 
them who fulfil their trusts and others who do not. 

4. Anything of the world taken in exchange for faith in Allah and fulfilment of His pledge - no matter how much it may 
be - is little and worthless when compared to the reward and ranks in the Afterlife. 


iUS (ji -Cj \ 6^3® Lf: 

*LAs LaJJ <510 
0> S\ 43 .Xp yy .\ 

























1* 


U 


CAJ* 




LJ (3^-r^ ^aSC>- 


-J^- 


(Sjp There is a group of Jews who twist their tongues 
when reciting the Torah that was revealed by Allah, 
so that you think that they are reciting from the To¬ 
rah, whereas it is not from the Torah. Instead, it is 
their lies and fabrications against Allah. They say: 

What we recite has been revealed by Allah - where¬ 
as it was not revealed by Allah. They tell lies about 
Allah when they know they are lying against Allah 
and His messengers. 

@ It is not right for a man whom Allah gives a 
book revealed by Him, together with knowledge 
and understanding and selects him as a prophet, to 
say then to people, ‘Become servants of me instead 
of Allah’. Rather, he should say to them: Be right¬ 
eous scholars-acting on what you know, because 
of your teaching the revealed book to people and 
because of your studying it by memorising and un¬ 
derstanding it. 

(jfp It is also not right for such a man to instruct 
you to take the angels and the prophets as lords to 
be worshipped besides Allah. Is it possible that he 
would instruct you to disbelieve after you have be¬ 
come devoted and have surrendered to Him? 

(JjS) Remember, O Messenger, when Allah took 
an affirmed promise from the prophets, saying to 
them: If I give you a revealed book, teach you wis¬ 
dom and make you reach a high rank and status, 
and then My Messenger comes to you confirming 
the book and wisdom that you have, then you must 
accept what he brings and help him as his follow¬ 
ers. Do you, O prophets, accept this and give Me a 
firm commitment for that? They replied, ‘We ac¬ 
cept that’. Allah said: Bear witness against your¬ 
selves and your communities, and I will also be a witness against you and them. 

(j|S) Whoever turns away after this promise witnessed by Allah and His messengers, they are the ones who leave the reli¬ 
gion of Allah and His obedience. 

(jp Do these people, who leave the religion of Allah and His obedience, look for something other than the religion Allah 
has chosen for His worship when every creation in the heavens and earth surrenders to Him, whether willingly like the 
believers, or unwillingly, like the disbelievers? Then all of creation will return to Him on the Day of Resurrection to give 
an account for their actions. 

® Beneficial Points : 

1. The verses show the misguidance of those Jewish scholars and how they plotted in distorting the word of Allah. They 
also lied to people by making up things about Allah. 

2. Any person who claims to follow one of the religions of the prophets of Allah but does not have faith in Muhammad 
(peace be upon him) has broken his promise with Allah. 

3. The men of Allah, who combine practice with knowledge and teach people to do the same, are those who hold the 
highest rank in Allah’s sight. 

4. The worst form of misguidance is to turn away from the religion of Allah to Whom all of creation, good and bad, 
surrender. 


'■111 
uJ 

jX-1«• JL 


A1 ‘Imran 























4jH^ V^lx-i-Jp\ Uj 4j^\^Lii\^Js 

Wi ^[*-Zj^J ]j l^JjjL&J ^>cZj 1$ 

]\ 


\r^3 


^JL 


i j\^ lu) j ^j-^cy^-^ (^) 

4J^ AX-SiL)\ 4^-31^“ 

^ 


!>* Ifc o^\ Sl{$> OjJJ^ 

5^ <1>\0 (jL^ Jyj-t 4^\ O^ipcL^V^ ciiVi jJo 

* 4 >j£T| 



\J&, 




<3 Say, O Messenger, that you have faith in Al¬ 
lah, doing as He instructs you, and that you have 
faith in the revelation that was given to you, and 
to Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac and Jacob, and in what 
was revealed to the prophets among Jacob’s de¬ 
scendants, and in the scriptures and miracles that 
were given to Moses, Jesus and all the prophets by 
their Lord. Also, say that you make no distinction 
between them, believing in all of them, and that you 
are bound to Allah alone, surrendering in devotion 
to Him. 

@ Whoever seeks a path other than that which Al¬ 
lah has endorsed - the path of surrendering (Islam) 
- it will not be accepted from them by Allah. They 
will be of those who have lost their souls by enter¬ 
ing the fire of Hell. 

(lj§S) How shall Allah grant faith in Him and in His 
messengers to a people who disbelieved after hav¬ 
ing faith in Allah and witnessing that what the 
Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him) brought 
was the truth, and after clear proofs of the truth of 
this have come to them? Allah does not grant faith 
in Him to a people who are wrongdoers and who 
choose error instead of guidance. 

(jj} The reward of those wrongdoers who choose 
falsehood is the condemnation of Allah and the an¬ 
gels and the people all together; and they are ex¬ 
cluded and removed from the mercy of Allah. 

Jj§5 These disbelievers will live eternally in the fire 
of Hell, never to leave! Their suffering will not be 
lightened and they will not be given more time to 
repent and ask for forgiveness. 

SfJ} This punishment is for everyone except those 
who repent to Allah, asking for forgiveness, after their disbelief and disobedience, and correct what they have done. Truly, 
Allah is Forgiving and Compassionate to those who repent to Him. 

@ Those who disbelieve after having faith, and stick to this disbelief until they die, then repenting to Allah and asking 
for forgiveness at the time of death, will not have this accepted from them, as the time for acceptance would have expired. 
They are those who have lost their way from the straight path which leads to Allah. 

@ Those who disbelieve and die while in disbelief will not be able to ransom themselves from receiving the punishment 
of Allah, even were they to try and ransom themselves with the weight of the entire earth in gold. They will have a painful 
punishment, and they will have no helpers on the Day of Judgement to remove them from their suffering. 

Beneficial Points : 

1. Allah has made it obligatory to believe in all of the prophets Allah sent, and all the scriptures which He revealed to 
them, without making any distinction between them. 

2. Allah will not accept any way of life, whatever it may be, after He sent the Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him), 
except the path of Islam: surrendering in devotion to Allah, which he came with. 

3. Whoever stubbornly continues in their error, Allah will not give them success in repenting to Him and in finding 
guidance. 

4. The opportunity for repentance is open to everyone until the time of death, or when the sun will rise from where it sets. 

5. A person will only be saved from the suffering of the fire of Hell on the Day of Judgement by the good they have done. 
No wealth - even if it were equal to the entire earth - can help them in any way. 

























1Y 


1 


^1^-^,’^r 51^=== ^L*la3\jp*(£)JL^^o "ajij'o^ Jlij 
4>j O' ^liSi 




l>-i 


Cysjd^j^i 

"■>. 


,X X. 


>ol.VItejLi\S 5jjj^i\jjJ)lS ja 
dUlijlS^J^i aJo jJ=>S\ a)S ^tf* i&Jz\ j^o($) j 


■ 


<!4($) 


fU5 


/* , 




L>\ s- AjS (^) ^La\l-XJfcj I 


L> 


@ O believers, you will not receive the reward 
of the people of goodness and their rank until you 
spend the wealth you love in the way of Allah. 

Whatever you spend, big or small, Allah is aware of 
your intentions and of what you do; and everyone 
will be rewarded accordingly. 

{§} All wholesome foods were lawful for the Isra¬ 
elites, except which Jacob (peace be upon him) had 
made unlawful for himself before the Torah was re¬ 
vealed. These were not, as the Jews claimed to the 
Prophet Muhammad, made unlawful in the Torah. 

Tell them, O Prophet, to bring the Torah and read it 
if they are telling the truth in what they claim. 

When the Jews heard this, they did not know how 
to respond, so they did not bring the Torah to recite 
to him. This is an example of the Jews changing 
things and not telling the truth about what was in 
the Torah. 

@ Whoever invents a lie against Allah after the ev¬ 
idence has been made clear - such as the fact that 
Jacob made certain foods unlawful for himself in a 
vow and that they were not made unlawful by Al¬ 
lah — then they are wronging themselves by turning 
away from the obvious truth. 

{§} Tell them, O Prophet, that Allah has spoken 
the truth about Jacob (peace be upon him), and in 
everything that He has revealed and established in 
the sacred law. Also, tell them to follow the religion 
Abraham (peace be upon him): he abandoned all 
other ways of life for the path of surrendering in de¬ 
votion to Allah, by worshipping Him and following 
His sacred law - he only worshipped Allah. 

The first House built on earth for all people to 
worship Allah was the Sacred House of Allah in Makkah: a House of worship full of worldly and sacred blessings, and 
guidance for all the worlds. 

@ In this place of worship are clear signs of its special honour and blessings, such as the acts of worship performed in it, 
and its landmarks, including the stone that Abraham stood on when he was raising the walls of the Kaaba; and whoever 
enters it is safe, with no harm coming to them. People have a duty to Allah to perform the acts of Hajj in this House of 
worship, if they are able to do so. Whoever rejects the duty of Hajj disbelieves in Allah, and Allah is in no need of them 
or anything all in the worlds. 

@ O Prophet, ask the People of the Scripture, the Jews and the Christians, why they reject the proof of the truth of your 
prophet-hood, including the proofs that came in the Torah and the Gospel, when Allah watches over everything you do, 
witnessing it, and will reward you accordingly. 

O Prophet, ask the People of the Scripture, the Jews and the Christians, why they stop people who have faith from the 
Religion of Allah, wanting to twist it from the truth to falsehood, and turning its people from guidance to misguidance, 
when they witness that it is the truth confirming what is in their scriptures. Allah is not unaware of what they do in dis¬ 
believing it and preventing people from following it; and they will be repaid accordingly. 

{§| O you who have faith in Allah and follow His Prophet, if you follow a group of the People of the Scripture, from the 
Jews or the Christians, in what they say, and accept their opinion in what they claim, then you will return to disbelief after 
your faith because of their envy and their misguidance. 

® Beneficial Points : 

1. The Jews falsely claimed that the foods which Jacob (peace be upon him) had made unlawful were revealed in the 
Torah. 

2. The Sacred House is the greatest and most honoured place of worship, as it was the first House established for the 
worship of Allah, and has special characteristics that are not found anywhere else. 

3. Every Muslim who is sane, adult and able is obligated by the sacred law to perform the Hajj. Those who fulfil these 
conditions should not delay making Hajj, nor make excuses for not doing so. 


* o 

\ iSji {^} j 

a 9^0 5 C ^ 


A1 ‘Imran 


62 


























nr 





o "fr "ST ^ o -f . s'S ^ ^ s'40 0^.40 . , fr [ 

^^\j S i^^p5-aj'^lj ^Aj\_Sj ( _3=»-'^Ui\^_5l5_3\ W^-5 j 

i^lv? \j3ps3 v ^5\ji c ^- 

^$CjAL^jAj *_^\ji-\A_p\JL^1\ ^ =C k> 4ji\ < 

5 jJ^jjdS ^ 0 OjS^p I 


|p How could you disbelieve in Allah after you 
have had faith in Him, especially when you have 
the biggest reason for having firm faith with you? 
The verses of Allah are being recited to you, and 
the Messenger Muhammad (peace be upon him) is 
making them clear to you. Whoever holds on firmly 
to the Book of Allah and His Messenger’s way of 
life, Allah has guided them to the right path. 

HI O you who have faith in Allah and follow His 
Messenger, be mindful of Allah as you have been 
commanded, by following what He instructs you to 
do, and by staying away from what He prohibits 
you from doing; and be thankful for His favour, 
holding firmly to the religion He has given you, so 
that when you die, you die surrendering in devotion 
to Him. 

HI Hold tightly, O you who have faith, to the Book 
and the traditions of the Prophet, and do not do that 
which will bring division amongst you. Remember 
the blessings of Allah upon you when you were 
enemies before Islam, fighting each other for the 
slightest reason, and He brought your hearts togeth¬ 
er through Islam, so that you became brothers in 
your faith through His grace, showing each other 
love and respect and listening to each other’s ad¬ 
vice. Before that you were on the brink of enter¬ 
ing the fire of Hell because of your disbelief. Allah 
saved you from the fire of Hell through Islam and 
guided you to faith. In the way that Allah has made 
this clear to you, He also makes clear to you what 
will put things right for you in this world and the 
Afterlife, so that you are guided to the right way 
of life. 

HI Let there be from you, O believers, a group who calls to all that is good and loved by Allah, instructing people to do 
what is right from the sacred law and from what you know to be good and just; and forbidding what is wrong, which is 
prohibited by the sacred law and which you know to be wrong and unjust. The people who do this will have complete 
success in this world and the Afterlife. 

HI Do not be, O believers, like the People of the Scripture who became divided into different groups and divisions, dis¬ 
agreeing about their faith and way of life after clear signs had come to them from Allah. Such people will have a great 
punishment from Allah. 

HI This great punishment will come upon them on the Day of Judgement, when the faces of those who have faith will 
become whitened, lighting up with joy and happiness; and the faces of those who denied the truth will become blackened, 
darkened with sadness and despair. As for those whose faces become blackened on that great day, they will be asked how 
they could reject faith in Allah alone, and deny the promise they made with Him that they would not worship anything 
besides Him, when they had had faith and acknowledged it. They will be told to taste the punishment Allah has prepared 
for them because of their disbelief. 

HI As for those whose faces become whitened, they will remain in Paradise, eternally blessed. 

O Prophet, these verses recited to you which contain Allah’s promises and threats, are true in what they contain of 
information, and just in what they contain of laws. Allah does not desire injustice for any creature in the worlds, and no 
one receives a punishment unless they earned it through their own bad actions. 

^ Beneficial Points : 

1. Following the desires of the People of the Scripture leads to error and leaving the sacred path of Allah. 

2. Strictly following the guidance in the Book and the traditions of the Prophet is the best way to become firm in the truth, 
and to be protected from error and becoming divided. 

3. The division and disagreements of today in the Muslim nation concerning issues of faith also occurred among the 
People of the Scripture who came earlier. 

4. A Muslim must call to what is right and forbid what is wrong, because this is the way that the nation will succeed and 
grow. 





















^jj^iojps cr^M^r j4 d' 

<J^0^4ji\j 0^^^>^===S_UiJ \ ^ OjA-X-JJ 



ijL^liC' cL^rV^J 4J^ .J illSj 

^IdddJ ^4jd C^li^OjJ-Afe=L> \y 
l^ilJ ** {^CL9AJ^i^^ 3 > ~J)^ > 

^ ^ ^ 2 ^ 22 ■ ^ 22 ^, y $. ^ ^ ^ ^ 5 - _-_ ^ 

4ii\ C^o) *■ A^-jlS A_^a\ ^ cV^ ^ 0^-d^ >J 




A3\s 


Aj-*kkLe-^ 


HI To Allah alone belongs all that is in the heav¬ 
ens and in the earth, in creation and decree, and 
everything will return to Him on the Day of Judge¬ 
ment, when everyone will be rewarded according to 
what they have done. 

HI You are, O Community of Muhammad (peace 
be upon him), the best of all communities that Al¬ 
lah has produced for humanity - in your faith and 
actions - and the most beneficial for other people: 
instructing what is right according to the sacred law 
and what you know to be right, and forbidding what 
is wrong according to the sacred law and what you 
know to be wrong; and having certain faith in Al¬ 
lah, so that it shows in your actions. If the People of 
the Scripture, the Jews and the Christians, had faith 
in Muhammad it would be better for them in this 
world and in the Afterlife. Only few of the People 
of the Scripture believe in what Muhammad (peace 
be upon him) came with and most of them do not 
stay within the sacred way of life and sacred law 

of Allah. \ CP^Ait) \&l\\ 

(fj| If they are against you they will not harm you, 

O believers, in your belief, or in yourselves, except 
through their words: criticising your faith and mak¬ 
ing fun of you and so on. Also, if they fight you 
they will flee from you in defeat, and will never be 
victorious over you. 

(Sfj| Humiliation and shame has been made to sur¬ 
round them wherever they are, and they are only 
safe with a contract or protection from Allah or 
from people. They have earned the anger of Allah, 
and need and poverty has been made to surround 
them. This is due to their rejection of the signs of 
Allah, killing the prophets unjustly, and because they rebelled and overstepped the limits of Allah. 

(Jl| Having made clear what many of the People of the Scripture are like, Allah then explains that there is a group among 
them who are upright and stand by the truth - not all the People of the Scripture are the same. Rather, there is a group 
among them who follow the Religion of Allah: doing as Allah instructs and staying away from what He has prohibited, 
reading the verses of Allah in the hours of the night, and praying to Him. 

This group existed before the Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him) was sent, and became Muslim when they met 
him and understood his message. 

They have certain faith in Allah and the Last Day, instructing what is right and good, and forbidding what is wrong 
and evil, and they take initiative in doing good actions, taking advantage of the seasons of worship. Such people are from 
among Allah’s servants who have righteous intentions and actions. 

|j| Whatever good these people do, whether it is little or much, their reward for it will not be lost. Allah knows those who 
are Mindful, who follow what He instructs, and stay away from what He prohibits. None of what they do is hidden from 
Him, and they will be rewarded accordingly. 

^ Beneficial Points : 

1. One of the greatest features that distinguished the Muslim nation, after faith in Allah, is the instructing of what is right 
and forbidding what is wrong. 

2. Allah has decreed humiliation for the People of the Scripture due to their turning away from Allah’s sacred way of life, 
and because they did not fulfil their promises. 

3. The People of the Scripture are not all the same. Among them are those who do what Allah instructs, follow the reli¬ 
gion, and respect His limits; and so, they will have a great reward. Such people existed before the Prophet Muhammad 
(peace be upon him) was sent. 


3 i($) 



















0 it 25 }\j 4jit 


UJa^UIS. 


v4. 


2 ,- 


■\p^ 


WSe 


SA55 Cp\S 0^ < jjiiaj L^Ll |^3J 

fe.j^4jbyj^ 

(_^J^-L»J^-4_a£^\ ^5 5 O->0 5j-L? 


'V 




^^==?^]^Lp \^>\ ii$ Ll*\< 


Jj jJl&J^r ^3\^i»\2fc({fe) 




'Sf 




Disbelievers in Allah and His Messenger will 
not be helped against Allah by their wealth or chil¬ 
dren: they will not prevent His punislnnent or bring 
His mercy to them; rather, their suffering and dis¬ 
tress will only increase, and they will be eternally 
companions of the fire of Hell. 

@ The example of what disbelievers spend in char¬ 
ity, and what they expect to receive of rewards, is 
like a wind which is extremely cold that hits the 
crops of a people who wronged themselves by not 
doing as they were instructed, ruining their crops 
when they had expected to have a good harvest. 
Disbelief also ruins the rewards of good deeds. Al¬ 
lah does not wrong them for He is far above any in¬ 
justice, rather, they wrong themselves through their 
disbelief in Allah and His prophets. 

(jj| O you who have faith in Allah and follow His 
Prophet, do not take unbelievers as close friends, 
letting them know your secrets and private busi¬ 
ness. They will not stop trying to harm you and 
ruin things for you, wanting what will hurt you and 
making things really difficult for you. Their hatred 
and hostility has appeared in what they say; in their 
criticism of your faith and worship, in incidents be¬ 
tween you, and in them giving away your secrets. 
In their hearts they have even more hatred. Allah 
has made clear to you what is in your interests in 
this world and in the Afterlife, if you use your in¬ 
tellect to understand what your Lord has revealed 
to you. 

HI It is you, O believers, who love these people, 
and want goodness for them, but they do not love 
you, and do not wish you well. Rather, they hate 
you, while you have faith in all of the scriptures, including their scriptures; yet they do not have faith in the Scripture 
which Allah revealed to your Prophet. If they meet you they say with their tongues, 4 We have faith’, yet when they are 
alone together they bite the tips of their fingers in distress and rage because of how united you are, the strength of Islam, 
and because of their own humiliation and shame. Tell these people, O Prophet, to stay as they are until they die in their 
rage. Allah knows what faith and disbelief and what good and evil there is in people’s hearts. 

@) If a blessing comes to you in the forms of victory over an enemy, or an increase in wealth or children, then worry and 
sadness overcomes them; and if a misfortune hits you, such as the victory of an enemy over you, or a decrease in wealth 
or children, then they are happy, rejoicing at your misfortune. If you are patient with Allah’s commands and decree, and 
are mindful of not earning Allah’s anger, then their tricks and attempts to hurt you will not harm you. Allah encompasses 
all their plotting and what they do, and will make them fail. 

{H Remember, O Prophet, when some of the believers disobeyed the instruction of Allah and His Messenger, and this 
happened when you left Medina to fight the idolaters in the Battle of Uhud, after you had posted the believers in their 
places for battle, and their positions were clear. Allah hears whatever you say and knows whatever you do. 

® Beneficial Points : 

1. Whatever the disbelievers spend in the path of good will not be of any benefit to them with Allah, because they do not 
fulfil the conditions of having faith in Allah and following His sacred law. 

2. The believers are prohibited from becoming close friends with the disbelievers, and from telling them their private 
business and secrets. 

3. The disbelievers are happy when something bad happens to those who have faith, and feel rage when something good 
happens to them. 

4. Protection from the plots and schemes of the disbelievers is through patience, not showing fear; and by being Mindful, 
which brings about strength and victory. 


0_^jx2a55 

0 JLjz bg 



A1 ‘Imran 


65 



















j 


YL 




4 cul 

4 J i\ >14jl;-L j . X&j0 0 y^yS\ yi===^L^ 

s^VX^aii (J_jSj _>. £=^jxi *Ui\ \_^A3\j 

c|3jt 






_>?-/£ 0-^==j> Ly bJv>^J O1^5 0 02^/4 

0 ^^ dS3Li\ cft>-i^ «■ ^=^5^j x4>\ joa 

Aj p — =t-j_^Xa ^.n. A\_jt>-\jaj (w?) 

^ jUi\ A^PjJ-^Sl f/v 3 "^ Wi 

>JZJ\ 

fe®JU^J^%lU4c4 4*445 fe 

4jLat-l>Ig^ La2«-^g\ ^jp\ y j\\ 
AjC^ ^ \yL>Vj® dJ>^M^k===^ 'ajS\yu\j 

j 0 ^JpJ 3 ^ 3 ^\^ 0 &^ 

A1 ‘Imran 66 


IP Remember, O Prophet, what happened to two 
groups of the believers from Ban! Salamah and 
Ban! Harithah, when they became weak and almost 
withdrew when the hypocrites drew back; but Al¬ 
lah aided them, making them firm in fighting, and 
turning them away from what they had been on the 
edge of doing. So, let those who have faith look to 
Allah alone for support, no matter what may hap¬ 
pen to them. 

<|1| Allah gave you victory over the idolaters in the 
Battle of Badr despite your small numbers and re¬ 
sources. Therefore, be Mindful so that you may be 
thankful for the blessings He has given you. 

HI Remember, O Prophet, when you roused the be¬ 
lievers during the battle of Badr, reassuring them 
after they heard that reinforcements were on their 
way for the idolaters, by asking whether it was not 
enough for them that Allah should help them with 
three thousand angels sent down from Him to rein¬ 
force them in the battle. 

(jf| Indeed, that is enough, and there is good news 
for you of more aid from Allah if you are coura¬ 
geous in fighting and are Mindful: if the reinforce¬ 
ments of your enemies come rushing at you, then 
your Lord will help you with five thousand angels, 
with clear marks on them and their horses. 

(jl| Allah did not tell you of this reinforcement 
with angels, except as news to please and reassure 
your hearts. For in fact, victory does not just come 
through material means, but comes only from Al¬ 
lah the Mighty, Who no one has any authority over. 

Wise in His decree and sacred laws. 

@ Your victory in the Battle of Badr was because 
Allah willed that a group of the disbelievers be destroyed, and another be humiliated, frustrating them through defeat so 
that they withdrew. 

(|!| After the believers had been afflicted in the Battle of Uhud, the Prophet (peace be upon him) prayed to Allah to destroy 
the idolaters and some of their leaders. Yet Allah told him that the matter of destruction and punishment lies only with 
Him alone and that the Prophet has no decision in it. So, be patient until Allah decides between you: either allowing them 
to repent to Him, asking for forgiveness, so that they are saved; or permitting them to continue in their disbelief, so that 
they are punished. Those continuing in disbelief are wrongdoers and deserve a punishment. 

HI To Allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth, in its creation and arrangement. He forgives the disobedience 
of whomever He wills of His servants through His Mercy, and punishes whom He wills through His Justice. Allah is 
Forgiving and Merciful to those who repent to Him. 

Hi O you who have faith in Allah and follow His Prophet, stay away from usury: increasing and compounding the wealth 
that you lend to people as the people of the time of ignorance before Islam did; and be mindful of Allah: following what 
He instructs and staying away from what He has prohibited, so that you may reach the good you desire in this world and 
in the Afterlife. 

@ Protect yourselves from the fire of Hell that Allah has prepared for the disbelievers through doing good and staying 
away from what is prohibited. 

(|f| Obey Allah and His Messenger by following what He instructs and staying away from what He has prohibited, so that 
you may gain His mercy in this world and in the Afterlife. 

® Beneficial Points : 

1. The blessings and trials that people have should be mentioned as an example for others. 

2. Being constantly mindful of Allah and patient during the difficulties of fighting are some of the biggest reasons for 
Allah giving victory to His servants. 3. Every matter is in Allah’s dominion. He decrees and judges as He wills, and the 
true believer surrenders wholeheartedly to Allah, submitting to His wisdom. 4. Sins in general, and usury in particular, is 
one of the biggest causes for people’s ruin, especially in countries where conditions are difficult. 

5. Being mindful of Allah and obeying Him are some of the biggest causes for Allah’s mercy and kindness to people. 


























jWj 


1 


tj-J * 
^]£-j^\ C-*l $3^vsU 


\yC^\^\^ixMj{ 




PA- 


£. Zl\^£pi\\j ^ = 3' V^li )ffj\ "kj^>zjl 


S \\'y^T ^jC«S 

^rJj^Ci) 



{J^X£==J&\ A^aiP ^ J 

^Jfl-g; y° 9L$A-J> 9< tl)L>^Aifc(*v) 


© Rush to do good actions, and draw near to Allah 
through doing as He instructs, so that you achieve 
the great forgiveness of Allah and enter a Paradise 
as wide as the heavens and the earth, which Allah 
has prepared for the Mindful. 

© The Mindful are those who spend their wealth 
for the sake of Allah, in ease and hardship, who con¬ 
trol their anger when they could seek revenge, and 
who forgive those who wrong them. Allah loves the 
doers of good, whose behaviour is this way. 

© They are the ones; if they were to commit a 
major sin, or wrong themselves by committing a 
lesser sin, they remember Allah, and His warning 
to the wrongdoers and promise to the Mindful; so 
they ask their Lord for forgiveness, regretting what 
they did. They ask Allah not to take them to account 
for it, because Allah alone can forgive, and they do 
not continue in their disobedience. They know that 
they have done wrong and that Allah forgives all 
disobedience. 

(jf| The Mindful people who are like this, and have 
these praiseworthy qualities, are rewarded with Al¬ 
lah’s forgiveness and His overlooking what they 
have done. In the Afterlife, they will have gardens 
with rivers flowing below palaces, where they will 
live eternally. How blessed is the reward for those 
who act according to Allah’s laws! 

© When the believers were tested by what hap¬ 
pened to them on the day of Uhud, Allah comforted 
them by saying that what afflicted them was part of 
the divinely ordained laws of life, i.e. the believers 
suffering trials at the hands of the disbelievers and 
overcoming them in the end after their trial. Similar 
incidents have therefore come to pass in times before them. So, travel the earth and learn from seeing what the fate of 
those who disbelieved in Allah and His messengers was: their houses are now empty and their power has disappeared. 
© This noble Qur’an is a clarification of the truth, and a warning against what is false, for all people. It shows the path 
to guidance and the limits for the Mindful, because it is they who benefit from the guidance it contains. 

© Do not become weak, O believers, and do not be sad about what happened to you on the day of Uhud. That is not 
appropriate for you, because you are superior because of your faith, and the uppermost with Allah’s help and the hope of 
victory, if you have faith in Allah and in His promise to those who are Mindful. 

© O believers, if you suffered injuries and losses on the day of Uhud, then the disbelievers also suffered injuries and 
losses just as you did. Allah distributes such days between people, whether they have faith or disbelieve, giving victory 
and defeat as He wills, for reasons of great wisdom. Among these reasons is to make it clear, those who truly have faith 
as opposed to those who are hypocrites, and to honour whomever He wills with martyrdom in His cause. Allah dislikes 
those who wrong themselves by giving up striving in his path. 

^ Beneficial Points : 

1. The believer is encouraged to hasten to do good actions, taking advantage of the time left in life before it is too late. 

2. One of the things that make the Mindful worthy of entering Paradise is that they spend from their wealth in every 
situation, control their anger, forgive people and are kind to creation. 

3. Looking at what happened to peoples of the past is one of the best ways to learn lessons - those who have hearts are 
able to understand this. 

4. Those who fight for Allah’s cause are different from the idolaters, even if they receive the same pain and hurt in this 
world as the idolaters do. This is because of their hope of reward from Allah, and hope of His victory. 
























AA 




| ]>&rCi$&[’jJteb \yt JHofe-. 

\ — (t^) cJr^rO^ai 

Li»*i la j(^l)jJ. io£_AA Ojis^jXa3 oJZb J\jLS | 
J-s a j' ^ Cf)$ S-^t) \ Cjt AS- JAN i 




@ Apart of this wisdom of changing fortunes is the 
purification of those who have faith from their sins, 
separating them from the hypocrites, and destroy¬ 
ing and removing those who reject the truth. 

HI Did you think, O believers, that you would en¬ 
ter Paradise before such trials and tests that prove 
which of you really struggle for the sake of Allah 
and are patient with the trials they are given? 

HI O believers, you wished to meet the disbelievers 
so that you could gain martyrdom for the sake of 
Allah, like your brothers did on the day of Badr, be¬ 
fore you saw the severity and ways of death. Now 
on the day of Uhud you have seen what you wished 
for with your own eyes. 

On the day of Uhud, when a rumour about the death 
of the Prophet (peace be on him) spread among the 
people, Allah revealed the following verse, scold¬ 
ing those who sat back in despair because of it: 

HI Muhammad is only a Messenger like the mes¬ 
sengers of Allah who came before him, who died 
or were killed. If he were to die or be killed would 
you turn back from your faith, and stop fighting? 

Whoever among you turns back from his faith will 
not harm Allah in any way. He is the Strong, the 
Victorious. Such a person only harms himself by 
exposing himself to loss in this world and the Af¬ 
terlife. Allah will reward those who are thankful 
to Him by making them firm in their faith and in 
struggling for His sake. 

@ No person can die except by the divine decree 
of Allah, when the time Allah has written for them 
has come to an end and their set time of death has 
arrived: their life will not be made longer or shorter. 

Whoever desires worldly gain through what they do, Allah will give them of it, according to what He has decreed for 
them, and they will have no share in the Afterlife. Yet whoever desires the reward of Allah in the Afterlife through what 
they do, Allah will give them its reward, and He will give a great reward to those who are thankful to their Lord. 

(fH Many of Allah’s prophets fought with many groups of their followers. They were not cowardly about fighting because 
of death and wounds that they received for Allah’s sake; and they did not weaken in fighting the enemy or surrender to 
them, but they were patient and firm. Allah loves those who are patient with hardship and misfortune for His sake. 

|f| When they were given these trials, these patient people asked Allah to forgive them for their disobedience and for 
overstepping the limits in what they did, to make their feet firm when they meet their enemy, and to help them against 
those who disbelieved in Him. 

HI So, Allah gave them the reward of this life by giving them victory and strength, and gave them the most excellent 
reward of the Afterlife, where they will receive His favour, and live in bliss eternally in Paradise. Allah loves those who 
always try to do their best in their worship and transactions. 

Beneficial Points : 

1. Giving people trials is a divine custom, which distinguishes those who truly and patiently struggle for the sake of Allah 
from those who do not. 

2. Striving for the sake of Allah, and calling to His path, should not be dependent on a particular person, no matter how 
important they may be. 

3. The length of life that people will have is fixed by Allah: it will not be made longer by mere hope or acting cowardly, 
nor made shorter by being courageous in battle. 

4. The goals and intentions of people differ: some desire the reward of Allah, and some desire this world. Everyone will 
be rewarded according to their intentions and actions. 


J ___ __■ ,_' ^ ^ _ ^ ^ ^ 




















| j 

*1^ 


\ 


g'. ^y i Qjbj j 

I jiiit'i^i^S^u^ayj^u 



@ O you who have faith in Allah and follow His 
Messenger, if you obey the disbelieving Jews, 
Christians and idolaters in the misguidance they 
instruct you in, then you will return after your faith 
back to the disbelief you were upon, and you will 
become losers in this world and in the Afterlife. 
HI These disbelievers will not help you if you obey 
them; rather, Allah is your helper against your en¬ 
emies. So, obey Him, for He, may He be glorified, 
is the best of helpers, and you will not need anyone 
apart from Him. 

@ Allah will put great fear in the hearts of the dis¬ 
believers, so that they are not able to stand firm to 
fight you. This is because of worshipping false Al- 
lahs next to Allah, and following their own desires, 
when no proof has been sent down to them to do so. 
Their resting place in the Afterlife will be the fire of 
Hell. What a miserable resting place the fire of Hell 
is for the wrongdoers! 

HI Allah kept the promise He gave you of victo¬ 
ry over your enemies on the day of Uhud, when 
you were engaging them in battle, by Allah’s per¬ 
mission, until you became weaker in your resolve 
to do as the Messenger had commanded you, and 
you disagreed about whether to stay at your posts 
or leave them in order to obtain the gains of war. 
You disobeyed the Messenger’s command to stay 
at your positions no matter what may happen. This 
occurred after Allah showed you the victory over 
your enemies that you wanted so much. Among you 
are those who desire the goods of this world, and it 
was those who left their positions; and among you 
are those who desire the reward of the Afterlife, and 
it was those who stayed at their positions, obeying the Messenger’s command. Then Allah turned you away from them 
and gave them power over you so as to test you, and to make clear who were the believers who were patient with trials and 
who were those who abandoned their positions and became weak. Allah has indeed forgiven you for what you committed 
when you went against the Messenger’s command, and Allah’s grace for the believers is great: guiding them to faith, 
forgiving their disobedience, and rewarding them for the difficulties they go through. 

{f§| Remember, O believers, when you ran away on the day of Uhud, when failure came upon you because you went 
against the command of the Messenger. None of you looked at anyone else, and the Messenger called you from behind, 
between you and the idolaters, saying, ‘Come to me, servants of Allah! Come to me, servants of Allah!’Allah repaid you 
for this with pain and distress, followed by pain and distress: first because of the victory and gains of war you lost; and 
then with the rumour that the Prophet had been killed that spread among you. Later you came to know that the Prophet 
had not been killed, so that you would not grieve about the victory and gains of war that you lost, or the deaths and 
wounds that you received, as a way of making misfortune and pain easier on you. Allah is aware of everything you do 
and of everything in your hearts. 

® Beneficial Points : 

1. The believers are warned against obeying the disbelievers and being guided by their desires: this leads to loss in this 
world and in the Afterlife. 

2. One of the ways Allah gives victory to the believers is by instilling fear into the hearts of the enemies of Allah. 

3. One of the biggest causes of defeat in battle is attachment to this world and the desire for the gains of war. 

4. Another reason for defeat in battle is going against the commander of the army and not obeying his orders. 

5. Allah cares for the believers in every circumstance, even in the trials and tests He gives to them. 


is is $>]&£ 




A1 ‘Imran 






















V* 


U J^'- ■ S* ^"..-..fl^ J3 \Js?_9 


| ^ft*=rl^ ciijSi 


l«j 



LJrUjbJ 

li? tl£^ ^ 5lO£Dj -W=^ CJ^ Jo ^_Ac 4j$\j 

if oUia^J (_^ji \ J“5i 



££- 


Then He sent down on you, after the pain and ti£zej)ur“ 

distress, peace and security. A group among you, 
who trusted in the promise of Allah, became over¬ 
come by sleep because of the peace and serenity in 
their hearts. Another group were not blessed with 
security or sleep, and they were the hypocrites, who 
only worried about their own safety, and felt upset 
and scared. They thought badly of Allah, thinking 
that He would not help His Prophet or support His 
servants, like those of the time of ignorance before 
Islam did, who did not understand Allah’s reality. 

These hypocrites said, due to their ignorance of Al¬ 
lah, that they did not have a say in whether they 
went out to fight; and if they had, they would not 
have done so. Tell them, O Prophet, in reply, that 
everything that happens is up to Allah, and that He 
decreed that they would go out to fight. These hyp¬ 
ocrites hide in themselves doubt and bad opinion 
which they do not show to you, saying that if they 
had a say in whether they had gone to fight, then 
people would not have been killed in this place. Tell 
them, O Prophet, in reply, that if they had been in 
their houses far from the places of battle and death, 
those whom Allah had destined to be killed would 
inevitably go out to the places of their death. Allah 
only did this to test the intentions and motives in 
your hearts, and to reveal the faith and hypocrisy in 
them. Allah knows what is in the hearts of people, 
and nothing is hidden from Him. 

Ip Those of you who were defeated, O Compan¬ 
ions of Muhammad (peace be upon him), on the 
day the army of the idolaters and the army of the 
Muslims met at Uhud, it was Satan who made you 
slip, because of what you had earned from doing wrong. Allah has forgiven them, and will not take them to account for it, 
out of His favour and mercy. Allah forgives those who repent to Him, and is Forbearing, not quick to punish. 

HI O you who have faith in Allah and follow His Prophet, do not be like those among the hypocrites who disbelieve, 
who do not have faith in destiny and Allah’s decree, and who say of their relatives if they travel to earn a living or go out 
to fight and they die or are killed: If they had stayed with us, and not gone or not fought, then they would not have died 
or been killed. Allah makes this belief in their hearts increase their regret. Allah alone gives life and death as He wills: 
staying behind would not stop His decree, and going would not bring it more quickly. Allah sees what you do. None of 
what you do is hidden from Him and you will be rewarded according to what you do. 

(|§| If you are killed or die in Allah’s path, O believers, Allah will forgive you and be merciful with you, and that is better 
than this world along with what the people of this world collect of its passing pleasures. 

Beneficial Points : 

1. Ignorance of Allah and His attributes leads to wrong belief and the corruption of actions. 

2. Allah cares for those close to Him and protects them in every situation. 

3. The lifespan of people is fixed and determined: being daring and courageous does not shorten life; and being cowardly 
and careful does not lengthen it. 

4. Allah tests people: to distinguish the good from the bad. 

5. One of the greatest and most noble ranks before Allah the Exalted is the rank of the martyr for the sake of Allah. 




s, 








A1 ‘Imran 




















15505 ’jSldtjijSz cj^5 



4$j*£=£j& <j\0 \ d^z"^ 51 s5^ 

55$jU55<_s 5t>5 j>3 ii5 o'55^=^ 5JJ5*^ 



J^= i$y jli 2 ^j5^^_^5^15jo\j Jiio 5*5 5-5 

iSy&J £-< — j|jf[ 

__5*?5\ L P5o_jJi^>r Aj_j\^_j 4ji\ 

4 XSJ05jl5J 

4-^ 5T^5^^>55 

^y^ ^2 9 ^ I 


If you die - however you may die - or you are 
killed in Allah’s path, you will all return to Allah 
alone, and He will reward you according to what 
you have done. 

(jf| Due to Allah’s great mercy, your character, O 
Prophet, was made to be gentle with your Compan¬ 
ions. If you were harsh in your words and actions 
and hard-hearted, they would have left you. So, 
pardon them their shortcomings with you and ask 
Allah to forgive them for what is between them and 
Allah; and ask their opinion in whatever needs to be 
agreed upon. Then if you decide on something after 
agreeing together, then go ahead with it, and trust 
in Allah. Allah loves those who trust in Him, giving 
them success and support. 

(jp If Allah supports you with His help and aid, then 
no one can overcome you, even if everyone in the 
earth came together against you; yet if He does not 
help or protect you, then no one can help you after 
Him. Help is in His Hands alone. So let those who 
have faith depend on Him and on no one else. 

|p No of the prophets of Allah would be dishonest 
and take anything from the gains of war which Al¬ 
lah had not assigned for him. Whoever dishonestly 
takes something from the gains of war will be re¬ 
paid by being disgraced on the Day of Judgement: 
carrying whatever he took in front of creation. Then 
every soul will be given the total reward of what 
they earned. No one will be wronged by any ad¬ 
dition to their disobedience or by any subtraction 
from their good actions. 

(jp Before Allah, someone who has faith and does 
good actions that please Allah is not the same as 
someone who disbelieves and does wrong, earning Allah’s anger and Hell as their resting place. What an awful resting 
place and destination Hell is! 

|p They are different in the ranks and levels in the Afterlife: those who follow Allah’s pleasure find their places in 
Paradise, according to how high their rank in it is; and those who follow what displeases Allah find their places in Hell, 
according to how low their rank in it is. Allah sees what they do. Nothing is hidden from Him, and everyone will be 
rewarded according to what they do. 

|p Allah blessed the believers and favoured them when He sent them a messenger from among them, who: recited the 
Qur’an to them, purified them from worshipping others next to Allah and from shameful character traits, and taught them 
the Qur’an and the ways of the Prophet (peace be upon him). Before this Messenger was sent, they were clearly astray 
from the right path and guidance. 

|p O believers, when disaster struck you at Uhud, and many of you were killed, and you had beforehand afflicted on your 
enemies a disaster twice as great in terms of those killed and captured on the day of Badr; why then did you ask where 
this calamity came from? You claimed that since you are believers and the Prophet of Allah is with you, it should not 
have occurred. Tell them, O Prophet, that what happened to them came from their own actions and disobedience. Allah is 
powerful over all things, giving victory to whomever He wills, and leaving whomever He wills. 

® Beneficial Points : 

1. True victory comes from Allah the Exalted. He is the Powerful, Who cannot be fought against; the Mighty, Who cannot 
be overcome. 

2. The state of someone in the world who follows the guidance of Allah and acts accordingly is not the same as the state 
of someone who turns away from it and rejects it, just as they will not be the same in rank in the Afterlife. 

3. From the grace and blessings of Allah to the believers is that He sent a messenger to them who was like them, who 
spent time with them and was their friend, and made it easy for them to learn from him and to act as he did. 

4. The misfortune and distress that a person is given in this world may be because of their disobedience, or it may be a test 
that will raise them up in rank. However, it must be remembered that Allah pardons and overlooks many sins. 

























4' aj 


VY 


~iAi 


c|\^i3 Vi(j^i Vp^A? C^) 
^ V^S^X^ojJ \5 ^*3 3 \ jl 






■sd^\ 


>1? 


y^\j 


<yj$ OrCll^Sj(^) O^A-^> 


j£3r*i 


|f| The death, wounds and defeat you suffered on 
the day of Uhud, when your army and the army of 
the idolaters met, was by the permission and decree 
of Allah, with far-reaching wisdom behind it: to 
make it clear who truly had faith. 

(jl| And He did this in order to demonstrate who 
the hypocrites were! When they were told to fight 
in Allah’s path, or to defend their womenfolk and 
their people, they said, ‘Had we known that you 
were going to fight properly, then we would have 
followed you; but you actually throw yourselves to 
death!’ At that moment, they were closer to show¬ 
ing their disbelief than their faith, saying with their 
tongues what was not in their hearts. Allah knows 
best what they hide in their breasts, and will repay 
them accordingly. 

|f| Those who stayed behind from fighting, and 
said of their relatives who suffered on the day of 
Uhud that if they had done as they said and not 

gone to fight then they would not have been killed, < K A ^ ^ A t&\ ^ * sYL 9 \*L sJU *_\T ** 

tell them, O Prophet, in reply, to keep death away 
from themselves when it arrives, if they are telling 
the truth in their claim that they would not have 
been killed if they had listened to them; and that the 
reason they themselves escaped death was because 
they stayed behind from fighting in Allah’s cause. 

(|I| Do not think, O Prophet, that those who have 
been killed struggling for the sake of Allah are 
dead. Rather, they are alive with their Lord in His 
generosity, provided with blessings that we do not 
know about. 

HI They are delighted and rejoicing in what Allah 
has given them from His grace, and looking for¬ 
ward to meeting their brothers who are still on earth. If they are killed during a similar struggle, then they will receive 
the same grace as them. There is no fear on them in terms of what awaits them in the Afterlife, and no sorrow about any 
worldly fortunes that passed them by. 

HI They rejoice in the great reward that awaits them from Allah, and the increase of great reward, and that Allah does not 
let the reward of those who have faith go to waste, but repays it completely, and increases it. 

Those who responded to the instruction of Allah and His Messenger when they were called to go out and fight for the 
sake of Allah, and to meet the idolaters in the battle of Hamra’ Al-Asad, which followed the battle of Uhud, after they 
had suffered wounds on the day of Uhud, their wounds did not stop them from responding to the call of Allah and His 
Messenger. Those of them who acted nobly, and were Mindful in following His instructions and keeping away from what 
He had prohibited, will have a great reward from Allah: Paradise. 

HI Some of the idolaters said to them that the Quraysh, led by Abu Sufyan, had come together in great numbers to fight 
against them and to finish them off, warning them against meeting them. But their words and attempts to scare them only 
increased their reliance on Allah and their trust in His promise. So they went out to meet them, saying that Allah was 
enough for them and that He is the best Protector, while committing their lives to Him. 

® Beneficial Points : 

1. One of the customs of Allah is to test His servants so as to distinguish the real believer from the lying hypocrite. 

2. Allah has a great regard for those striving for good and He rewards such people with the highest ranks. 

3. The divine will and decree of Allah is an absolute reality, and there is no way to escape it. 

4. The virtue of the Companions and their high rank in this world and in the Afterlife, is because of what they sacrificed 
from themselves and their wealth for the sake of Allah. 


0 

















They returned from the battle of Hamra’ Al-As- 
a ad with a great reward from Allah, an increase in 
Sr their rank and security from their enemy, whilst suf- 
fering no deaths or wounds. They did what pleased 
^ Allah, always doing as He instructed and not going 
^ ^ ^ ^ ^ Jp* against Him; and the grace of Allah for His servants 

ji ilb%gT who have faith is s reat - 

^ ^ ~ ^ It is only Satan frightening you with his help- 


|\S U3\( wp J i LS'yi&J 




30yj^<&Sh 

ijl 0^===^ ($) 








^Jo)i>cAj fVjj \ 

-r \ \ A” <. *' K. 111S g° ocl tor them because tt 

Sf^ live long, remaining as they 

a s'^ V« s' •». jj . v£ nnt qc tVi r*\r fKinl r TVio\/ qiy> a» 


ers and supporters. Do not fear them, because they 
have no power or strength; but fear Allah alone, by 
always doing as He instructs, if you truly have faith 
in Him. 

(SH Do not sorrow, O Messenger, because of those 
hypocrites who rush to disbelief, turning on their 
heels. They do not harm Allah in any way, but only 
P* harm themselves by distancing themselves from 
faith in Allah and from doing as He instructs. Allah 
wills their defeat and failure, and that they will have 
no portion of bliss in the Afterlife: they will have a 
great punishment in the fire of Hell. 

HI Those who exchange faith for disbelief will not 
harm Allah in any way: He is the Mighty and free 
from any need of His creation. They only harm 
themselves, and they will have a painful punish¬ 
ment in the Afterlife. 

@ Those who disbelieve in their Lord and stub¬ 
bornly resist His sacred law should not think that 
it is good for them because they are given time and 
are, in disbelief. It is 

* i» \> <s - Z not as they think. They are only given more time to 

\$ multiply in sin, disobedience upon their disobedi¬ 

ence: they will have a humiliating punishment. 
Allah would not leave you, O believers, as you 
are, mixed with the hypocrites with no separation between you, without making it clear those who truly have faith. So He 
separates you through different obligations and trials, to make clear those who have faith and those who are hypocrites, 
and to separate the good from the bad. 

He would not give you knowledge of the Ghaib so that you could distinguish between a believer and a hypocrite; but Al¬ 
lah chooses whomever He wills of His messengers and gives them some knowledge of the Ghaib, as He gave His Prophet 
Muhammad (peace be upon him) knowledge of the state of the hypocrites. So have faith in Allah and His Messenger; and 
if you truly have faith and are mindful of Allah, then follow His instructions and stay away from what He has prohibited 
- so that you gain a great reward from Allah. 

(j§| Those who are not generous with the blessings Allah has given them out of His kindness, not fulfilling Allah’s right 
with it, should not think that this is good for them. Rather, it is bad for them, because whatever they are miserly with will 
be hung around their necks on the Day of Judgement as a punishment. 

To Allah alone belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth. He is the Living after all His creation has passed away. 
Allah is well aware of the good and evil that you do, and will reward you accordingly. 

® Beneficial Points : 

1. The believers should not pay attention to Satan trying to intimidate them with his assistants and helpers from among 
the disbelievers, because everything is up to Allah. 

2. A person should not be misled by Allah giving them respite; rather, they should rush to repent to Allah, asking for His 
forgiveness in the time given to them before it passes. 

3. It is Allah’s custom to put His servants to the test through different trials: to distinguish those who are bad from those 
who are good, and the believer from the hypocrite. 

4. The miser who withholds the bounty Allah has given him only harms himself by depriving himself of rewards and 
gains from Allah, the Generous, the Giving, and exposing himself to the consequences of such behaviour on the Day of 
Judgement. 
















Vi 






^■* - 


j^===oj£\ <JL-^ jSI^_j ( w ) J\e 

^14$ is oj\0 Ju^s. ^ 5 j%pja( 



>- jS Js j>\j§ 



(jp Allah certainly heard when the Jews said that 
Allah was poor, because He asked them for a 
‘loan’, and that they were rich because of their 
wealth. Allah will record this shameful statement 
in their record of actions along with the eagerness 
of their ancestors in killing the prophets of Allah on 
purpose and unjustly. Allah will tell all of them to 
taste the punishment of burning in the fire of Hell. 

|f| This punishment is because of the disobedience 
and disgraceful acts you committed with your own 
hands, O Jews! Allah does not wrong any of His 
servants. 

(Jl| They are those who lied in their claim that Allah 
had instructed them in His scripture and from His 
prophets to not have faith in a messenger unless he 
came to them with a charitable offering which fire 
would then bum from the sky. In their claiming this 
they also restricted other miraculous signs and ev¬ 
idences the prophets came with. Due to this, Allah 
instructed His Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon 
him) to ask them why, when messengers had come 
to them before with clear proofs of the truth of their 
message, and even with what they had mentioned 
of an offering burned by fire from the sky, did they 
reject them and kill them if they were telling the 
truth! 

HI If they reject you, O Prophet, do not feel sad¬ 
dened, because it is normal for the disbelievers to 
act like this. Many messengers were rejected be¬ 
fore you, who came with clear proofs, and books 
containing teachings and great wisdom, and the 
scripture, guiding people through the rulings of the 
sacred law. 

HI Every soul, no matter its state, must taste death. No created being should be dazzled by this world. On the Day of 
Judgement, you will be given the reward for your actions in full, with nothing decreased. Whoever Allah averted from the 
fire of Hell and granted entry into Paradise, has achieved real success. The life of this world is only a passing enjoyment 
- only those who are misled become attached to it. 

HI You will certainly be tested, O believers, in your wealth - in relation to fulfilling your duties concerning it - and with 
the misfortunes sent down with it, and in yourselves with regards to how you conduct yourselves with the orders and 
prohibitions of the sacred law. Also, you will certainly hear many things from those who were given the scripture before 
you, and from those who worship others with Allah, that are hurtful to you, criticising you and your sacred way of life. 
But if you are patient with the misfortunes and trials you are given, and are mindful of Allah, doing what He instructs 
and staying away from what He has prohibited, then that will lead to the good consequences and it is a matter O believers 
that requires firm resolve. 

Beneficial Points : 

1. These verses indicate the extent of the bad behaviour of the Jews and their lies against Allah and His prophets. 

2. Some of the bad actions of these Jews included their attacks on the prophets of Allah, rejecting and killing them. 

3. Allah has decreed death for everyone, so no one can escape it. The intelligent person should, therefore, make efforts 
to prepare for it. 

4. Every success in this world is deficient, and complete success is only in the Afterlife, by being saved from the fire of 
Hell and entering Paradise. 

5. One way a believer is tested is through what harm comes to them from the People of the Scripture and the idolaters, 
and when this happens, it is necessary to have patience and to be Allah-conscious. 


'k. 2 

^ / •> 0 ** C- ^ __ _ ^ ^ 


A1 ‘Imran 

























V 0 


9j\ Slj 

I J^j^p^jjb jXL^ 

Cry^£-^l ($) 


(jp Remember, O Prophet, when Allah took a firm 
promise from the scholars among the Christians 
and Jews: that they should make the revelation of 
Allah clear to people, and not hide the guidance 
in it, or the evidence of the prophethood of Mu¬ 
hammad (peace be upon him). But they broke the 
promise and paid no attention to it, hiding the truth 
and revealing what was false. They exchanged the 
promise of Allah for a small price, such as the po¬ 
sition or wealth it might buy them. What a terrible 
price they traded Allah’s promise for! 

(jl| Do not think, O Prophet, that those who rejoice 
in the shameful actions they have committed, and 
who love people to praise them for good things 
which they did not do, are secure and safe from the 
punishment. Rather, Hell is their place, and they 
will have a painful punishment. 

(jl| With Allah alone is the dominion of the heavens 
and the earth and all that is in them: in its crea¬ 
tion and administration. Allah is powerful over all 
things. 

HI In the creation of the heavens and the earth, 
from nothing with no precedent, and in the follow¬ 
ing of the night and day, and the difference in their 
length, are clear signs for those of understanding, 
which lead them to the Creator of the universe, 
worthy alone of worship. 

(JIJ) Those who remember Allah in all conditions 
- standing, sitting and lying on their sides - and 
reflect on the creation of the heavens and the earth, 
saying that their Lord did not originate this wonder¬ 
ful creation without a reason, and is far above that, 
and ask Him to protect them from the punishment 
of the fire of Hell, by enabling them to do good and protecting them from doing wrong - they say: 

(jf| Our Lord, whoever You enter into the fire of Hell from your creation has been humiliated and disgraced. 

On the Day of Judgement, the wrongdoers will have no helpers to protect them from Allah’s punishment and repayment. 
(jl| Our Lord, we have heard a caller to faith saying, ‘Have faith in your Lord’. So we responded to him and have faith 
in what he calls us to and we follow the sacred law, so forgive us our sins and do not disgrace us; and do not take us to 
account for our bad actions. Let us die with the righteous; and enable us to do good and stay away from disobedience. 
@) Our Lord, give us guidance and the help in this world that You promised us through the words of Your messengers, 
and do not disgrace us on the Day of Judgement by entering us into the fire of Hell. Our Lord, You are generous and never 
do You break Your promise. 

® Beneficial Points : 

1. Among the characteristics of the bad scholars among the People of the Scripture is their hiding of knowledge, follow¬ 
ing desires and liking the praise of people despite their corrupt nature and what they hide of evil. 

2. The best lessons and evidences for people of deep thought in recognizing the Creator are found in what Allah has 
created in the universe and in people’s own selves. 

3. Thinking about the creation of Allah leads to certainty in the greatness of Allah and perfect humility towards Him, the 
Mighty and Majestic. 

4. Calling on Allah and humility of the heart to Him are among the most perfect expressions of worship. 


| 

I ($)^\2i\ I 




^ y y ^ 








A1 ‘Imran 






















;vij 


I W& 1 


^ u< z' «• “» ° ^ ^ _^-° 3 s' s' _ » 0 9 \ ^ 

dya£=^i 

J^ s ' 

^<J\J^lyl £~-30 X^AJj^J 4ji\ 

> ^' 

A 


\y£\ lyi& \ 0^=^ ($) r^ ^ 

^=4\yi 


>\; 


Ip So their Lord responded to their prayer, saying 
that He does not allow the reward of anything you 
do, small or big, to be lost, whether the person who 
does it is male or female. You are from one another 
in your origins, and the faith that you follow does 
not reward males and females differently. Those 
who emigrated for the sake of Allah (driven from 
their homes by the disbelievers), suffered harm in 
order to obey their Lord, and who fought for the 
sake of Allah and died so that the Word of Allah 
would be supreme, they will certainly be forgiven 
their sins on the Day of Judgement: it will be over¬ 
looked, and they will be entered into gardens with 
rivers flowing under their palaces, as a reward from 
Allah - with Allah is the best reward, unlike any 
other. 

HI O Prophet, do not feel burdened nor distressed 
by the movement of the disbelievers in the land, 
and their power and the extent of their trade and 
provision. All of this is passing, and all that they 
will have left is their bad deeds. 

|1| This world is a brief enjoyment that does not 
last. The destination they will return to on the Day 
of Judgement will be Hell — what a terrible resting 
place the fire of Hell is for them! 

IH Yet those who are mindful of their Lord, follow¬ 
ing His instructions and staying away from what He 
has prohibited, they will receive gardens with rivers 
flowing under their palaces, where they shall live 
eternally - a reward prepared for them from Allah. 

What Allah has prepared for the righteous is better 
than any of the worldly pleasures the disbelievers 
may have obtained. 

@ Nevertheless, the People of the Scripture are not all the same. There is a group among them who have faith in Allah, 
the truth and guidance He revealed to you and what was revealed to them in their scriptures; and they do not discriminate 
between the messengers of Allah, but humble themselves before Him, desiring what is with Him, and not exchanging His 
verses and signs for a small enjoyment in this world. Such people will have a great reward with their Lord. Allah is quick 
to take account of what people do, and quick to reward them. 

HI O you who have faith in Allah and follow His Messenger, be patient with the obligations of the sacred law, and with 
the misfortunes that you are given in this world; and outdo the disbelievers in patience and determination, so that they are 
not more patient than you; and struggle for the sake of Allah and be Mindful, following His instructions and staying away 
from what He has prohibited, so that you may reach what you desire of safety from the fire of Hell and entry into Paradise. 

® Beneficial Points : 

1. It is from Allah’s grace and mercy with His servants when He is quick to respond to their prayers and listen to their 
calls. 

2. It is from the perfect justice of Allah that He does not distinguish between men and women in their rewards for His 
obedience. 

3. The hann that a believer experiences in the sacred struggle for the sake of Allah when forced to emigrate from his home 
because of his faith is one of the greatest means by which sins are forgiven and rewards are multiplied. 

4. What the disbeliever may be given in this world in terms of wealth and enjoyment, even if great, is unimportant be¬ 
cause it is passing. The only thing that is important is the reality of what happens to them in the Afterlife in the abode of 
eternity. 

5. Among the People of the Scripture are those who bear witness to the truth which is in their books: they have faith in 
what was revealed to them and in what was revealed to the believers, so they have a double reward. 

6. Patience with the truth and struggling against those who reject it, while striving for the sake of it, is the path to success 
in the Afterlife. 


\ Vlls (n^j ^ 























The Women (Surah an-Nisa’) 




aJi 


vv 


Oj) XLa3 l£ jj \ 

I \ \y \<^5 0^ol AS^ i 




^ Themes of the Surah: 

This Surah outlines the organisation of Muslim so¬ 
ciety: protecting the rights of society and the distri¬ 
bution of wealth, removing the negative traces of 
the time of ignorance before Islam and focusing on 
the rights of women and of those who are weak. 

® Explanation: 

The surah gained its name because women are 
prominently mentioned in it, along with details of 
numerous laws concerning them. 

{JS> O people, be mindful of your Lord, for it is He 
Who created you from a single soul: your father 
Adam; and from Adam He created his wife Eve, 
your mother. From the two of them, He spread 
many people, both male and female, all over the 
earth. Be mindful of Allah when requesting others 
by Him, such as: T ask you, by Allah, to do such- 
and-such. Also, be mindful of breaking relations 
with your blood ties. Allah watches over you and 
nothing you do escapes Him; rather, He takes it into 
account and repays you accordingly. 

Guardians, give orphans (whose fathers have 
died and who have not yet reached maturity) their 
wealth in full when they come of age and have 
sound judgement. Do not exchange what is per¬ 
mitted for what is prohibited: taking what is good 
and valuable from the property of the orphans and 
replacing it with something bad and of little worth 
from your own property. Also, do not take the prop¬ 
erty of the orphans and combine it with your own 
wealth - that is a great crime before Allah. 

(Sj) If you fear that you will not be just in marrying the female orphans under your guardianship - fearing that you will 
not give them an appropriate dowry or will not treat them well - then do not marry them, and marry other women you 
choose. You may marry two, three or four; but if you fear that you will be unjust between them, then marry just one, or 
suffice with what you possess of slave women, for their rights are not the same as the rights of wives. This is the best way 
to avoid being unjust or biased. 

(Sj) Give women their dowries with good will. Yet if they gladly give up a part of the dowry to you, of their own free 
will, then there is nothing to stop you enjoying it. @ Guardians, do not give property to those who do not know how to 
manage it well. Allah made this property a way to serve the interests of people and for them to live on it, and such people 
are not able to manage their wealth well. Provide for them, clothe them and speak to them in a good way. Make a firm 
commitment to give them their property if they get sound judgement and become able to manage it well. @ Guardians, 
test the orphans when they are near to reaching maturity, by giving them a part of their wealth to see how they manage it. 
If they manage it well, and show you their sound judgement, hand over their property in full. Do not use up their wealth, 
overstepping the limits which Allah has approved for you: use their wealth only when necessary. Do not rush to use it up 
for fear that they will take it when they reach maturity. Whoever is wealthy should not use up the property of the orphan; 
and whoever is poor and has no wealth should only use what is necessary. When you hand over their property to them, 
upon their reaching maturity and showing sound judgement, have it witnessed; to protect rights and to prevent causes of 
disagreement. Allah is sufficient as a witness for that, and takes account of all that people do. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. All of humankind has the same origin. So they must be mindful of their Lord Who created them, and should be merciful 
to each other. 2. Allah commands kindness to those who are weak among women and orphans, so that the treatment of 
them should be just and generous. 3. It is permissible for a Muslim man to have up to four wives, with the condition of 
being just between them, and being able to support them. 4. It is legitimate to place the incompetent person who does 
not behave correctly under guardianship, for his own good and to protect him from wasting his wealth, which is used for 
his welfare in this world. 


13 ^ (£) & 3 \ 

iji\ \ ^ i> 

| £*Q i 


















o 


ojy* 


VA 


j 0 ^ 3 ^ -4^ \ .4/\ju <L^^> J W]i4 

i \j£J£— 2$\44 V^2=~tal$ 

ai4»>-fci£i3« 0 a^==^^J\j 

l|o^>^===\j \ \ CjJ^==^\-> ££aJ \ 


>> 


@ Men are to have a share of what their parents or 
relatives - such as brothers and sisters or uncles and 
aunts - leave when they die, whether it is much or 
little. Women are also to have a share of what they 
leave, which was not the way that things were in the 
time of ignorance before Islam, when women and 
children were left out of the inheritance. This share 
is a right and its amount is clearly set out - as made 
obligatory by Allah. 

<JS) If relatives, orphans and the poor, who do not 
inherit, are present at the time the inheritance is di¬ 
vided, then give them, out of kindness, some of this 
wealth before it is divided, for they may be look¬ 
ing at it with desire for a share; and it came to you 
without you doing anything. Also, speak to them in 
a kind way, without any meanness. 

Cp Let those executors and guardians fear in the 
manner they would if they had died and left young, 
weak children behind them, fearing they would be 
ruined. Let them be mindful of orphans under their 
guardianship, not doing any wrong to them. So that 
Allah brings about others to treat well their own 
children after they die, as they treated the orphans 
well. Let whoever is present at the making of will, 
say what is right for the children, so that the heirs 
are not wronged in the will. Nor should the giver 
deprive himself of this good deed by not leaving 
a will. 

@ Those who take the property of orphans and 
spend it wrongly and unjustly, they only swallow 
fire into themselves: they will bum in the fire of 
Hell on the Day of Judgement. 

@ Allah instructs you in the matter of the inher¬ 
itance of children that the inheritance should be divided between them. A son gets a share equal to the share of two 
daughters. If the person who died left daughters without a son, two daughters or more get two thirds of what is left. If 
there is just one daughter, she gets a half of what is left. 

For each of the parents of the person who has died, they get a sixth of what is left, if he has children. If he does not have 
children or any heir except for his parents, then the mother gets a third, and the father gets the rest. 

If the person who has died has two or more siblings, whether brothers, sisters, half-brothers, or half-sisters, then his moth¬ 
er gets a sixth as a share, and the father gets the rest - so the brothers and sisters are not given anything. 

This division of the inheritance is after the bequests of the will have been deducted, with the condition that the bequests 
in the will cannot be more than a third of the total wealth and debts have been repaid from the wealth. 

Allah has made the division of inheritance like this because you do not know whether your parents or your children are 
closer to you in benefit in this world and the next. For instance, a person may think well of someone and leave everything 
to them, or think badly of someone and not leave them anything, and they may be wrong in their opinion in both cases. 
Allah knows the reality of things and nothing is hidden from Him. For this reason, the division of inheritance is as He 
made clear, and He made it obligatory for His servants. Allah knows everything, and nothing is hidden from Him of what 
is good for His servants - He is Wise in His sacred law and administration. 

Beneficial Points: 

1. The inheritance laws of Islam give men and women their rights, so ensuring justice between them. 

2. The sanctity of the wealth of orphans is firmly established in the sacred law, and overstepping the limits with it or 
wasting it in any way is prohibited. 

3. The division of the inheritance in sacred law is based on ensuring justice between the inheritors and keeping in mind 
what will best serve their welfare. 

4. Due to the fact that wealth is one of the biggest reasons for disputes between people, Allah details the division of it 
through the laws of inheritance. 


Ac- c>\ cyt- \jjLaj 





















* " jjU * 




J ^.y 

n. t’tP 
4 ^j\ 



J^4> cLsJjl ^5 ’«l^b) 4UJ^= i5^(_y4£? 
I —i-^3 


@ You have half of what your wives leave, if they 
have no child. If they have a child, whether it is 
your child or not, then you get a fourth of the wealth 
they leave, after any bequest they have made and 
the repayment of any debts they had. 

Wives get a quarter of what you leave, if you have 
no child, whether it is their child or not. If you have 
a child, then they get an eighth of what you leave, 
after any bequest you have made and the repayment 
of any debts you had. 

If someone dies without any parents or children to 
inherit from them, but they have a brother or sister 
from the same mother as them, then each of them 
gets a sixth. If they have more than one brother 
or sister from the same mother as them, then they 
share a third, with brothers and sisters receiving the 
same share - this is after any bequest that they leave 
and the repayment of any debts they had, with the 
condition that the bequest does not cause harm to 
any of the inheritors, such as it being more than a 
third of the total of the wealth. 

The rulings contained in the verses about inher¬ 
itance law are an obligation on you, and Allah 
knows what is in the interests of His servants in this 
world and the Afterlife. He is forbearing, and not 
quick to punish. 

@ The rulings regarding orphans and other mat¬ 
ters mentioned above are the sacred laws of Allah, 
which Allah has given to His servants to follow. 
Whoever follows Allah and His Messenger in His 
instructions, staying away from what He has pro¬ 
hibited, Allah will enter them into gardens with riv¬ 
ers flowing beneath their palaces, where they will 
live eternally. That divine reward is the great success, which no other success comes near to. 

@ Whoever opposes Allah and His Messenger, by not following His laws or doubting them, and overstepping the limits 
He has made, He will enter them into a fire where they will remain - for them is a humiliating punishment there. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The inheritance wealth is not divided between the inheritors until any debts that the person who died had have been 
settled, and their lawful bequests have been taken from it, which cannot be more than a third of the total wealth. 

2. There is here a warning against being careless about the division of the inheritance, because it is Allah’s contract and 
His commandment to His believing servants, so it is forbidden to disregard it or to be careless about it. 

3. The characteristics of faith include following what Allah instructs and respecting what He has prohibited, and stopping 
at the limits He has established. 

4. Allah has made obligatory upon His servants these laws related to inheritance and its division between the inheritors 
and warned them against being complacent about them. 

5. It is from Allah’s justice and wisdom that He promises the greatest reward to those who are devoted to Him, and the 
greatest punishment to those who oppose Him and overstep His limits. 





an-Nisa 






















> 

* 




U>tL y&\j U\3 iWs j* -c'J-j 

l^Vp>.^ A ^-^=3 ^ u\ aU 1 



|jL*d£a\ 


^ Bs* 


Lj 3 ^j £3 




£ ^ 

/t * ■> ^ ^ t n ^ ^ 

J _)US=p*i O^j-o-J 


^ r& *S* *> *0 A tLi ^ ^ 

sjH-^sa^jUis 


<5p For those of your women who commit sexual 
offences - whether they are married or unmarried 
- call four trustworthy Muslim men witnesses. If 
they bear witness against them, then confine them 
to their homes as a punishment, until the end of 
their lives, or until Allah makes a way for them oth¬ 
er than being confined. 

The ruling of this verse was replaced with the rul¬ 
ing that unmarried women who have illicit sexual 
relations should be whipped a hundred times and 
banished for a year, and married women who have 
illicit sexual relations should be stoned. 

If two of your men commit a sexual offence - 
whether they are married or unmarried - punish 
them with words and blows, humiliating and dis¬ 
ciplining them. If they turn away from what they 
were doing and correct themselves, then do not 
harm them. 

Those who turn away from a sin and ask for for¬ 
giveness are like those who have not sinned. Allah 
turns to those who repent to Him asking for for¬ 
giveness, and is Compassionate with them. 

The ruling of this verse was replaced with the rul¬ 
ing that unmarried men who have illicit sexual rela¬ 
tions should be whipped a hundred times and ban¬ 
ished for a year, and married men who have illicit 
sexual relations should be stoned. 

@ Allah only turns in mercy and forgiveness to 
those who commit disobedience and overstep the 
limits out of foolishness and impulse, and who re¬ 
pent to Allah asking for His forgiveness before the 
time of their death. Allah forgives these people, by 
overlooking their disobedience. Allah knows the 
circumstances of people, and is Wise in His decree and sacred laws. 

(Sjj) Allah does not turn in mercy and forgiveness to those who continue in their disobedience, overstepping the limits and 
insisting on overstepping them, and not turning away from doing this until they are dying, then saying that they regret 
what they did and asking for Allah’s forgiveness. 

Also, Allah does not turn in mercy and forgiveness to those who die in disbelief - He has prepared a painful punishment 
for them. 

@ O you who have faith in Allah and follow His Messenger, you are not allowed to inherit the wives of your fathers in 
the way wealth is inherited or marry them, or give them in marriage, or stop them from marrying. 

Also, it is forbidden for you to retain your wives who you do not like in order to get them to give back some of what you 
gave to them, unless they have had illegal sexual relations. In that case, you can get them to return what you gave them. 
Be good companions to your women, not hurting them, and be kind to them. If you do not like them for some worldly 
reason, then be patient with them. Allah may put much good in what you do not like, both in the life of this world and in 
the Afterlife. 

Beneficial Points: 

1. Sexual immorality is among the most poisonous sins for the individual and for society, and for this reason the punish¬ 
ments for it are formidable. 

2. Allah is kind and merciful with His servants since He opens the door of repentance to every sinner, making it easier for 
them, and helps them to travel on its path. 

3. Whoever disobeys Allah, intentionally or unintentionally, is unaware of the greatness of He Whom they go against, and 
unaware of the effects of disobedience and the misfortune it brings upon them. 

4. A marriage is made successful when the spouses have a balanced perspective. Someone should not limit their consid¬ 
eration to what they do not like in their spouse, but should also look at the good in them. 

5. It is hoped that in the case of a man keeping his wife despite the things he might dislike about her, following the instruc¬ 
tion of Allah, that Allah will cause a great deal of good to come out of the things he dislikes about her. 


O^.^^====^(3^:^ )j 

\ _ 

B^S | an-Nisa " P 

















AJ' QJy* 


A \ 


*5 0^-3 ol ^ gj-j *j\ 51? 




_&? j as? aUS <3l 3==3 0 hh \43^j £544 
- * <-'' <* 
0-£5?<_>^L: 

=ib\a^oUl' 


5 ii($) 




■ JlS 


a 




-it 


1 §\ 




<jgS> If you want to divorce a woman and replace her 
with another, then you are allowed to do so; but if 
you gave the one you intend to divorce a great deal 
of wealth as a dowry, then you are not allowed to 
take anything back from it. Taking back what you 
gave to them would be an injustice and a clear sin. 
@ How could you take what you gave to them as 
a dowry after the relationship, love, enjoyment and 
sharing of secrets that has occurred between you? 
Greed for the wealth which is theirs after all this is 
forbidden and shameful. They took a sincere prom¬ 
ise from you, by which they became lawful to you 
through the Word of Allah and His sacred law. 

@ Do not marry women whom your fathers mar¬ 
ried. That is forbidden, unless it happened before in 
the time of ignorance, in which case you will not 
be taken to account for it. Sons marrying the wives 
of their fathers is a shameful practice, a cause for 
earning Allah’s anger. 

(jj} Allah has prohibited you to marry your moth¬ 
ers and grandmothers, your daughters and grand¬ 
daughters, your sisters and half-sisters, your aunts 
and great aunts, your nieces and their children, 
your milk-mothers who nursed you and your sisters 
through nursing, the mothers of your wives (wheth¬ 
er you have consummated the marriage or not), 
and the daughters of your wives by someone else 
(who were mostly raised in your houses, and also 
those who were not, if you have consummated the 
marriage; but if you have not, then there is nothing 
wrong with marrying their daughters). You are also 
prohibited to marry those who have been married to 
your own sons, even if they did not consummate the 
marriage, and this includes the wives of your sons through milk-kinship (nursing). It is prohibited for you to marry two 
sisters who are related by blood or by nursing, except if this happened in the time of ignorance before Islam, in which 
case Allah has forgiven it. Allah is Forgiving and Compassionate to His servants who repent to Him. 

In the traditions of the Prophet it is also confirmed that it is prohibited to marry a woman and her aunt at the same time. 
® Beneficial Points: 

1. Allah has allowed a couple to divorce, and has put this in the hands of the man. 

2. If a man has sexual relations with his wife, the dowry is fixed. He is not, then, allowed to touch it or covet it, even if 
he wishes to separate from her and divorce her. 

3. Allah has prohibited marriage to the wives of fathers, because it is an evil which anyone in their right mind with a 
wholesome nature hates. 

4. Allah clearly detailed which women it is allowed to marry, and which of them it is prohibited to marry, whether this is 
due to one’s family relationship with them, or relationship by marriage or wet-nursing, this is to honour her and protect 
her from transgression. 




-<4l 

S \j>jk=6^ Is-O 


hi 


hi 




9 \ 






an-Nisa 














@ Those who are already married are prohibited 
to you, except those who you have captured whilst 
fighting in Allah’s cause: they are allowed to you 
after making sure they are not pregnant - this is 
what Allah has decreed. 

All women other than those who have been prohib¬ 
ited are allowed for you, if you seek them with your 
wealth, in a chaste way, desiring what is lawful and 
not desiring sexual immorality. 

Give those you enjoy in marriage their dowry, 
which Allah has made an obligation on you. How¬ 
ever, there is nothing wrong if you mutually agree, 
after the obligation of the dowry has been set, to 
increase it, or to give up part of it. Allah knows His 
creation and nothing about them is hidden from 
Him. He is Wise in His administration and in His 
sacred law-giving. 

Whoever among you cannot marry a free wom¬ 
an, because he does not have enough wealth, is al¬ 
lowed to marry a believing slave owned by some¬ 
one else. Allah knows the reality of your faith and 
your situation, and you are equal in your faith and 
humanity, so do not look down on marrying them. 

Marry them with the permission of their owners, 
and give them their dowries without reducing the 
amount or delaying it. This is if they are chaste and 
do not commit sexual offences publicly and do not 
take lovers secretly. If you marry them and then 
they have illicit sexual relations, their punishment 
is half that of a free woman: fifty lashes, and not 
stoning, which is the punishment for chaste wom¬ 
en. Marrying chaste believing slave women is a 
concession for those who fear falling into illicit 
sexual relations, and who are not able to marry free women. Patience is preferable to marrying slave women though, so 
that the children do not become slaves. Allah is Forgiving and Compassionate to those of His servants who repent to Him, 
and it is from His mercy that He allowed marriage to slaves in the case of not being able to marry free women, for those 
who fear falling into illicit sexual relations. 

(J} Through these rulings, Allah - may He be glorified - wishes to make clear to you His sacred law and way of life, and 
what is in your interests in this world and in the Afterlife. He wishes to guide you to the ways of the prophets before you 
in allowing things and prohibiting them, and to their noble qualities, and praiseworthy behaviour, so you can follow them. 
He wishes to return you from disobedience to following Him. Allah knows what is in the interests of His servants, and 
makes His laws accordingly; and He is Wise in His sacred laws and in managing their lives. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Whether they be free women or slaves, it is not permissible to marry wives until they have completed their time of 
waiting (‘iddah), whatever the reason for this time of waiting may be. 

2. The woman’s dowry is obligatory after consummation of the marriage; but it is allowed for some of the dowry to be 
reduced if it is from her own free will. 

3. It is permissible to marry a believing slave if one is unable to marry a free woman, when one fears falling into illicit 
sexual relations. 

4. One of the aims of the sacred law is to make guidance clear from misguidance and to lead people to the ways of guid¬ 
ance which will bring them back to Allah. 


c * ^ G. 

i ^ . ... 



i 


C&s Pr\ t> A y^J 





an-Nisa’ 


82 


Part 5 


























- >r A > > 

l)’ 

‘ hjz Aj (1)^ ^ ‘ ^ 

\y3(t- CfJ$ Qj\S ( j~^~=CS- 

jJ^^<^\ v^^ssLjS 



r 




@ Allah wants to turn to you and forgive you your 
disobedience, while those who follow their low 
desires want you to turn far away from the correct 
way of life. 

(j§) Allah wants to make things easy for you in His 
sacred law. He does not burden you with more than 
you are able to do, because He knows the weakness 
of human beings in their creation and nature. 

@ O you who have faith in Allah and follow His 
Messenger, do not take the money of others unjust- 
£ ly, by force, stealing, bribery or by any other unjust 


4p £lij 



means. Instead, money should come from trade 
through mutual agreement and goodwill between 
the seller and buyer. In this way, it is lawful for you 
to enjoy and use such money. 

Do not kill one another, and do not kill yourselves, 
and do not throw yourselves to ruin. Allah is Com¬ 
passionate with you, and from His mercy He makes 
these laws. 

@ Whoever does the things which Allah has pro¬ 
hibited - taking the money of others, or wronging 
himself by killing and the like, doing wrong know¬ 
ingly, and not doing it out of ignorance or forgetful¬ 
ness -Allah will enter them into a great fire on the 
Day of Judgement, where they will suffer its burn¬ 
ing heat and receive their punishment. That is easy 
for Allah, because He is powerful over everything. 
@ O believers, if you avoid the major sins, such as 
worshipping others Allahs with Allah, disrespect¬ 
ing your parents, killing, and receiving interest on 
loans, then Allah will forgive you for smaller sins, 
wiping them out and erasing them. Then Allah will 
enter you into a noble place near to Him: Paradise. 
O believers, do not wish for what Allah favours some of you over others with, so that this does not lead to resentment 
and envy. Women should not wish for what Allah has given to men in particular: for men is a share from what they do, 
and for women is a share from what they do - neither of them is rewarded except through what they earn. Ask Allah to 
answer your prayers out of His favour to you. Allah knows all things. In His wisdom, He gives and withholds. 

For every one of you I have made relations to inherit from what parents and relatives leave in their inheritance; and 
for those who you have made a promise of allegiance with as an ally and helper, give them their share of the inheritance. 
I am a witness to everything, and I witness your oaths and promises. 

The ally inheriting was a ruling at the beginning of Islam, but this ruling was later replaced. 

{*> Beneficial Points: 

1. Allah’s mercy towards His servants is vast. He - glory be to Him - loves that they repent to Him; and He loves making 
things easier for them. As for the people of desires, they only want to lead them astray from guidance. 

2. The sacred law guards the rights of people, forbidding wrongdoing against people’s lives, wealth and honour and put 
in place the severest of punishments for it. 

3. Staying away from the major sins is a reason for entering Paradise and being forgiven for minor sins. 

4. Being content with Allah’s decree, not wishing for what other people have, keeps a person away from envy, and from 
resenting the decree of Allah. 


SCZLJ Hi Hi, 

^ aJ j ^ ^ XL 9 ^ '*0 } I 







an-Nisa’ 


83 
























•i-9 u^*i\ 

<sj>\ 

x > ? r r 



@ Men are responsible for women, protecting and 
taking care of them, because of the bounty He has 
given men over them, and because of their duty to 
maintain and take care of them. Righteous wom¬ 
en are devoted to their Lord, and devoted to their 
husbands, protecting things for them in their ab¬ 
sence through Allah’s help. The women who you 
fear would not show devotion to their husbands in 
what they say or do, first remind them of how they 
should act according to the sacred laws; if they do 
not change their ways, then leave them alone in 
bed, turning your back to them and not having sex¬ 
ual relations; and if they still do not change their 
ways, then strike them without any ferocity. If they 
become loyal again, then do not do anything against 
them, not wronging them nor blaming them. Allah 
is High in His essence, Great in His attributes, so be 
mindful of Him. 

If you fear that a disagreement between the two 
of them is leading to aggression and incompatibili¬ 
ty, then send a just man from the family of the hus¬ 
band, and a just man from the family of the wife 
to judge what the benefits of them separating or 
staying together might be. Staying together is pref¬ 
erable and better. If the two judges want this, using 
the best methods to get them back together, then 
Allah will make them come to an understanding, 
and the argument between them will be resolved. 

Allah is Knowing. Nothing about His creatures is 
hidden from Him, and He is Aware of what they 
hide in their hearts. 

@ Worship Allah alone faithfully and do not wor¬ 
ship next to Him anything else. Be good to your parents, honouring them and treating them with respect, and be good to 
relatives, orphans and the poor. Be good to the neighbour who is a relative and the neighbour who is not a relative; the 
friend you spend time with; the traveller who is a stranger and has no means whereby to complete his journey; and to 
slaves. Allah does not like those who think too much of themselves and are arrogant with people, and praise themselves 
as a way of boasting. 


II 

\j JL42S 




@> Allah does not like those who do not spend what Allah made a duty on them from the wealth He gave them out of His 
provision, and who instruct others through their words and actions to do the same as them: hiding the wealth, knowledge 
and other things which Allah has given them out of His grace; not showing people the truth, but hiding it instead and 
showing falsehood. These are among the traits of disbelief, and Allah has prepared a humiliating punishment for those 
who disbelieve. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The verses confirm men’s trusteeship over women because of Allah favouring them, and because of what is obligatory 
upon them regarding rights of maintenance. 

2. The husband has the right to try to improve the behaviour of his wife if she behaves in a way which is not loyal to him, 
following a gradual progression of measures without oppression or aggression. 

3. The verses declare the importance Allah places on the rights of the parents, putting them together with His rights, and 
stresses the importance of kindness to the various categories of people. 

4. Allah warns against traits of bad character, such as pride, boasting, stinginess, and hiding knowledge as well as not 
making it clear to people. 





















|A0j 



5L> 





e-1U_^W 


u 


I<Oilj \y-*\'t -^ | 

jX-h>^ <h\ 5^J> &\j^jj iL* 

4j,0_3s2 c£\j Jl) ^ <J VjaiU 

XLx^\ ^3-^ ^ 

c>J&&J&'Mt&&3 5 i^%23' li^T I 
^^^^yir.^|4U:i|3il^aTf 

t£rj\cS] \CjJ>r^J ^ 


9 9 



Ijp Allah has prepared this humiliating punishment 
for those who spend their wealth so that people no¬ 
tice them and praise them, and those who do not 
have faith in Allah and the Last Day. It is through 
following Satan that they have gone the wrong way. 
Whoever has Satan for a friend and companion has 
a terrible companion. 

@ What harm would it have done these people if 
they had faith in Allah and the Last Day and had 
spent their wealth for Allah’s sake, being sincere to 
Him? Rather, they would have received everything 
that is good by doing so. Allah has full knowledge 
of them. Nothing about them is hidden from Him 
and everyone will be rewarded according to what 
they do. 

@ Allah is Just and does not wrong His creatures 
in any way. He does not lessen the good they do 
by the weight of even a tiny particle or dust, and 
He does not add to their disobedience in any way. 
Even if only an atom’s worth of good is done, He 
multiplies the reward, from His grace, and through 
this increase He gives a great reward. 

|jS) What will it be like on the Day of Judgement, 
when Allah brings the prophet of each communi¬ 
ty to bear witness against their actions, and Allah 
brings the Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon 
him) as a witness for all the communities and mes¬ 
sengers? 

@ On that great day, those who disbelieved in Al¬ 
lah and went against His Messenger will wish they 
were dust and that the earth and they were level. 
They will not hide anything of what they did from 
Allah. Allah will seal their mouths so that they can¬ 
not speak and will give permission to their limbs to bear witness to what they did. 

@ O you who have faith in Allah and follow His Messenger, do not pray when you are drunk, until you recover from your 
drunkenness, and can tell what you are saying. (This ruling was before alcohol was completely forbidden.) 

Do not pray when you are in a state of major ritual impurity, and do not enter the mosques when you are in that state, 
except in passing, until you have washed your body. 

If you have an illness and cannot use water because of it, or if you are travelling, or have answered the call of nature, or 
have had sexual relations with women, and you cannot find water, then find clean earth, and wipe your faces and hands 
with it. Allah pardons your shortcomings and is Forgiving to you. 

@ O Messenger, do you not know about the Jews who were given a portion of knowledge in the Torah and traded guid¬ 
ance for error? They wish you would go astray from following the right way of life - which the Messenger came with 
- and that you would follow them in their deviation. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. From Allah’s perfect justice and mercy is that He does not wrong His servants in any way, no matter how little, and is 
gracious to them, multiplying their good actions. 

2. The disbeliever will wish to be dust because of the great horror of the Day of Judgement and the immense punishment 
that is waiting for him. 

3. Major ritual impurity prevents one from offering the prayer or staying in a mosque, although it is allowed to briefly 
pass through it. 

4. Allah makes things easy for His servants by permitting dry ablution when there is no water, or when it is not possible 
to use it. 


j ^ s' % s' ^ 9^ 


















sj£3\t 










ujj 4J^\j yPjy^ 4&j 

C^j^J ^ ^j^aX^===j \ 


1^ 

<? 4, 


|jp Allah knows your enemies better than you 
do, O believers, so He informs you of them and 
makes clear to you that they are against you. Al¬ 
lah is enough as a Protector, keeping you safe from 
them harming you; and Allah is enough as a Helper, 
stopping them from plotting against you and from 
hurting you. 

@ Among the Jews are an evil group who change 
the words Allah sent down, interpreting them in a 
way that they were not revealed. They say to the 
Messenger (peace be upon him), when he instructs 
them in something, that they hear and disobey, and 
say, “Listen to us, may you not hear!; and give the 
wrong impression when they say, ‘Ra’ina’: meaning 
‘watch over us’ when they really mean ‘ru’unah’ or 
‘silliness’, twisting what they say when they want 
to call the Prophet (peace be upon him) so that they 
say something insulting to the faith. If they had said 
‘We hear and obey’, instead of ‘We hear and dis¬ 
obey’; ‘Listen’, instead of “Listen to us, may you 
not hear!”; and had truly said, ‘Watch over us’, then 
these would have been better for them than what 
they said, and more appropriate, being worthy and 
correct behaviour in the presence of the Prophet 
(peace be upon him). But Allah condemned them 
and removed them from His mercy due to their dis¬ 
belief, because they do not have faith in any way 
that is beneficial. 

@ O you of the Jews and the Christians who were 
given the scripture, have faith in what I revealed to 
Muhammad (peace be upon him) which confirmed 
what you had in the Torah and the Gospel, before 
the faces are blotted out and are turned backwards; 
or they are removed from the mercy of Allah like those who broke the Sabbath by fishing when this had been prohibited 
to them, for which Allah transformed them into monkeys. Allah’s decree is certainly carried out. 

@ Allah does not forgive that anything from His creation should be associated to Him. Besides this and disbelief. He 
pardons the disobedience of whomever He wills, out of His bounty. Or He punishes those He wills among them accord¬ 
ing to their disobedience, out of His perfect justice. Whoever worships others next to Allah has committed a terrible sin, 
which is not forgiven if someone dies still doing it. 

@ Do you not know, O Messenger, the affair of those who are full of praise for themselves and of what they do? Allah 
alone praises whomever He wills, because He knows whatever is hidden in people’s hearts, and will not lessen the reward 
for their actions in any way, not even as much as the thread of a date stone. 

Look, O Messenger, how they create a lie against Allah in praising themselves. That is enough of a sin to demonstrate 
their misguidance. 

@ Do you not know, O Messenger, and wonder at the state of the Jews - who Allah gave a portion of knowledge - that 
believe in all sorts of false Allahs, and flatter the idolaters, saying that they are more rightly guided than the Companions 
of Muhammad (peace be upon him). 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Allah Help is sufficient for the believers and His Assistance suffices them. 

2. The Jews were guilty of distorting the word of Allah and displayed bad behaviour towards His Messenger (peace and 
blessings be upon him). 

3. The verses confirm show the danger of associating partners with Allah and disbelief in Him, and that those who die 
commiting these sins will not be forgiven. Other sins still being commited at the time of death may be forgiven. 


j 

ilaa 

j\ gf 


an-Nisa’ 


















|($)1 I 

J@ftS^\2}\5)jy$ A 

(^L^JaP^L_/AIU^\^d_a^Ci4_Ji^ r ■'—^^\^lr$l>5e. 1 -^*' 
Oajrir^l.ok V;\i 

1 )Qyxh ^k^S\\^j\y^V«. yMj0\^^yy- j 



{fp Those who have these corrupt beliefs are re¬ 
moved from Allah’s mercy, and whoever is re¬ 
moved from Allah’s mercy you will find no helper 
to protect them. 

{§} They do not have any share in the dominion, and 
if they did, they would not give people anything 
from it, not even as much as the speck on the sur¬ 
face of a date stone. 

@ Rather, they envy Muhammad (peace be upon 
him) and his Companions because of the prophet- 
hood, faith and establishment in the land which 
Allah has given to them. Why do they envy them 
when Allah gave the descendants of Abraham the 
revealed scripture and other revelation besides the 
scripture, and Allah gave them far-reaching power 
over people. 

@ Some of the People of the Scripture have faith 
in what Allah revealed to Abraham (peace be upon 
him), and to the prophets among his descendants; 
and there are those who denied this, and turned peo¬ 
ple away from having faith in it, and who do the 
same with what was revealed to the Prophet Mu¬ 
hammad (peace be upon him). The fire of Hell is 
sufficient as a punishment for those of them who 
disbelieve. 

Those who disbelieve in the signs and verses 
of Allah will be entered into a fire that surrounds 
them on the Day of Judgement. Whenever their 
skins have been burned, they will be replaced with 
fresh skins, so that they continue to feel the punish¬ 
ment. Allah is Mighty, and nothing detracts from 
His might. And He is Wise in His administration 
and decree. 

@ Those who have faith in Allah and follow His messengers, doing good actions, will be entered on the Day of Judge¬ 
ment into gardens with rivers flowing beneath their palaces, where they will live eternally. In these gardens there will be 
mates for them, purified from any impurity, and they will be entered into expansive refreshing shade. 

@ Allah instructs you, O believers, to return things in your care to the people who own them. 

He instructs you, if you judge between people in any matter, to judge between them with justice according to His sacred 
laws. 

Allah’s laws in every situation for you are, of course, excellent. Allah hears all that you say and sees all that you do. 

@ O you who have faith, follow Allah and His Messenger: doing what they instruct and staying away from what they 
prohibit, and follow those in authority, as long as they do not instruct you to do wrong. If you disagree about something, 
then refer it to Allah’s revelation and the traditions of His Prophet (peace be upon him), if you have faith in Allah and the 
Last Day. Referring to the revelation and the traditions is better than continuing in your disagreements and in giving mere 
opinions, and will bring about the best result for you. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. One of the biggest reasons for the disbelief of the People of the Scripture is their envy of the believers because of the 
prophethood and the establishment on earth which Allah has blessed them with. 

2. The sacred law establishes a duty to look after things that are put in your care, and to return them to the people who 
own them. 

3. Humankind must judge between people with justice, because they are prohibited from oppression and injustice. 

4. Allah has made it a duty to follow those in authority as long as they do not instruct disobedience, and to refer to the 
judgement of Allah and His Messenger, for this necessitates true faith. 


0 dlVi ^\ j ^\ j 4jA5I 















^ <^ioi<10 tfjjfcj 
,>4C^4 o\ £j&s-^ ■HJ& i?^o 3 1 \j)jr^ -^j 



•\ \i^Ji^===t> 0 \3j \_J& 
"S Vt_I>Sr>^ lAf^o ^ ^ JaA^-»»\g- a-J C-^a j5 





@ Have you not seen, O Messenger, the contradic¬ 
tion of the hypocrites among the Jews, who claim 
falsely that they have faith in what was revealed 
to you and in what was revealed to the messengers 
before you, but in resolving their disagreements 
want to refer back to what Allah has not legislat¬ 
ed, and what people have invented, when they were 
instructed to reject such things. Satan wants to lead 
them far away from the truth, and they will not be 
guided through this. 

@ If these hypocrites are told to come to the law 
that Allah has revealed in His Scripture, and to the 
Messenger to judge between them in their disagree¬ 
ments, you will see them, O Messenger, turning 
away from you completely to others. 

(j§S) How will their situation be when misfortunes 
come upon them because of the sins they have com¬ 
mitted, and then they come to you, O Messenger, 
apologising and swearing by Allah that when they 
turned to other things to try and settle their disa¬ 
greements they were only trying to do good and 
bring about reconciliation between the people who 
were disagreeing. What they say is false, and do¬ 
ing good involves following the rulings of Allah’s 
sacred law. 

@ Allah knows what hypocrisy and ulterior mo¬ 
tives these people hide in their hearts, so turn away 
from them, O Messenger, and make clear to them 
the laws of Allah: encouraging them to be loyal to 
Allah, making clear to them how wrong it is to turn 
away from Him, and advise them in a way that will 
move them. 

@ Allah did not send any messenger except to be 
followed in what they instructed by Allah’s will and decree. If, when they wronged themselves by committing sins, they 
had come to you, O Messenger, confessing what they had done and regretting it, repenting from what they did, and if 
they had asked for forgiveness from Allah, and you had asked for forgiveness for them, they would have found Allah 
Forgiving and Compassionate with them. 

@ What these hypocrites claim is not true. Allah swears by Himself that they will not have real faith until they refer for 
judgements to the Messenger, during his lifetime, and to the sacred law after his death, in every disagreement between 
them, and are happy with the Messenger’s ruling, without feeling hatred about it, or doubting it, and accepting it com¬ 
pletely and faithfully, outwardly and inwardly. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Seeking a decision not from the law of Allah, while being happy with it, goes against having faith in Allah. 

2. One of the most notable characteristics of the hypocrites is their lack of satisfaction with the law of Allah, and their 
giving priority to the judgement of false Allahs over the judgement of Allah. 

3. The believers are ordered to turn away from the people of ignorance and delusions and exhorted to be mindful of Allah. 

4. Complete faith is only with turning for a decision to the sacred law, with satisfaction of the heart and outside and inside 
acceptance of what the sacred law rules. 









an-Nisa’ 


























jJ=—==Cu^ \^cb\ 

J^\jL?^ i^L*3\S jTp- 
y^Sl-3^ \ ^Li^j 

L<*—^ 

X^3^0^-5 
.\ Aid ^\;^J\&0\i_x 



=\3 i^^lui\jLl*>\ jS 3^ 5^ 

Jj> d j Auu_? j 


@ If I had ordered them to kill one another or to 
leave their homes, then only a small number of 
them would have obeyed My instruction. So they 
should thank Me for not ordering them to do some¬ 
thing which would have been very difficult for 
them. If they had done what they were advised to 
do, it would have been better than going against the 
order, as well as being a stronger confirmation of 
their faith. 

@ If they had acted in obedience, I would have 
given them a great reward from Myself. 

@ And I would have enabled them to come on to 
the straight path that leads to Me and My Paradise. 
@ Those who follow Allah and the Messenger 
will be with those whom Allah has blessed with 
entry into Paradise from amongst the prophets, the 
truthful ones whose acceptance of what the proph¬ 
ets brought was complete and who practised it, the 
martyrs who were killed in Allah’s path, and the 
righteous whose outward and inward states and 
actions are virtuous. What excellent companions 
these are in Paradise! 

((J) This reward is Allah’s grace to His servants. Al¬ 
lah knows the states of the people and will reward 
them all accordingly. 

@ O you who have faith in Allah and follow His 
Messenger, be on your guard against your enemies 
by adopting the means that will help you to fight 
them. Go out to fight them one group after the other 
or go out altogether and do what is in your interests 
and what will bring loss to your enemies. 

(jp There are among you, O Muslims, some people 
who hesitate to go out to fight your enemies, be¬ 
cause of their cowardice, and who also try to keep others behind. They are the hypocrites and who are weak in faith. If 
you are killed or defeated, then one of them, happy that he is safe, says, ‘Allah has favoured me in that I was not present 
at the fight with them, otherwise I would have also been harmed like them’. 

@ If Allah’s grace of support and gains of war come to you, O Muslims, this person - who lags behind from striving in 
Allah’s path - says, as if there was friendship or affinity between you and him, ‘If only I was with them in that fight, I 
would have also gained great success’. Worldly benefits are the only goal of such a person. 

@ Let the true believers - who sell the life of this world in exchange for the Afterlife, desiring the Afterlife more than the 
goods of this world - fight in the path of Allah so that Allah’s Word is victorious. Anyone who fights in the path of Allah, 
so that His Word triumphs, and is killed as a martyr or defeats the enemy and is successful, Allah will give them a great 
reward: Paradise and the pleasure of Allah. 

Beneficial Points: 

1. The law of Allah, Mighty and Majestic, is based on ease and people are not responsible for doing more than they are 
able to do. 

2. The reward of obeying Allah and His Messenger is getting the companionship of the prophets, the devout, the martyrs 
and the righteous in Paradise. 

3. The duty to take precaution and care in all matters and hence making all appropriate preparation to fight the enemy. 

4. The verses contain a warning against being slow to engage in sacred struggle or opposing such a duty, because sacred 
struggle is the greatest of reasons for Muslims being strengthened and prevents the enemy from overpowering them. 






an-Nisa’ 


Part 5 




















@ What is preventing you, O believers, from 
striving in the path of Allah in order to raise His 
Word and to rescue the oppressed men, women and 
children who call to Allah, saying, ‘Our Lord, let 
us leave Makkah, because its people are oppres¬ 
sive - due to their associating partners with Allah 
and their aggression towards His servants. Give us 
someone from You who will take control of our af¬ 
fairs, take care of us and protect us from harm’. 

The true believers fight in the path of Allah in 
order to raise His Word. The disbelievers, on the 
other hand, fight in the path and way of Satan. So 
fight the supporters of Satan. If you fight them, you 
will defeat them, because Satan’s strategy is weak 
and it cannot harm those who place their reliance 
in Allah. 

@ Have you, O Messenger, thought about the con¬ 
dition of some of your Companions who asked that 
striving in Allah’s path be ordained for them, but 
they were told, ‘Restrain your hands from fighting, 
establish the prayer and give charity ’. 

This was before striving in Allah’s path was or¬ 
dained. When they migrated to Medina and Islam 
became strong, and fighting was ordained, they 
found it difficult, and some of them began fear¬ 
ing people as they should fear Allah or even more 
than that. They said, ‘Our Lord, why did You or¬ 
dain fighting for us? Why did You not delay it for 
a while so we could enjoy the worldly life’. Say to 
them, O Messenger: The enjoyment of the world, 
no matter how much, is little and perishable. Yet 
the Hereafter is better for the one who is mindful of 
Allah because its delights are everlasting. Your good 
thread that is on the date stone. 






AJ 


3^^ I 


o J ^ 


J0y. 




z>A\ 




an-Nisa’ 


Part 5 


actions will not be reduced in the least, not even to the extent of the 


@1 At any time and place, death will surely come to you when reach your prescribed life term, even if you are in guarded 
palaces far from battle. And when these hypocrites receive something pleasing, such as a child or wealth, they say, ‘This 
is from Allah’. Yet when they face some difficulty with respect to their children or wealth, they attribute a bad sign and 
misfortune to the Prophet (peace be upon him) and they say, ‘This evil is because of you’. Say, O Messenger, in response 
to these people: Everything, good or bad, occurs by Allah’s decree and decision. What is the matter with these people, 
who say such things, that they can hardly understand anything you tell them? 

@ O humankind, any good that pleases you - such as wealth or children - is from Allah. He has sent it to you through 
His grace. Whatever bad occurs to you in respect of your wealth or children is from your own self because of the sins 
you commit. 

I have sent you, O Prophet, as a messenger to all people to communicate to them the message of your Lord. Allah is 
enough of a witness to the truth of what you communicate from Him, because of the evidences and proof He has given 
you. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The sacred law has made it a duty to fight in order to raise the Word of Allah and to help the oppressed; and rebukes 
fear, cowardice, and opposition to the laws of Allah. 

2. The Afterlife is better than this world and what is in it, in terms of material things and desires, for whoever is mindful 
of Allah and obeys Allah. 

3. No matter how people try to protect themselves, the means of death will find them, even if they are in the strongest of 
fortresses. 

4. Good and evil is all according to the decree of Allah, and Allah may test His servants with some evil in this world for 
different reasons, such as sins and disobedience. 
















aj ) e>jy^ 


sS O y. s' _ 99 ^ ^ s' ''s' ''s' 

ii Xs^lyt^3jy)\^s> a^-Up O^y^j {£)Ua ;r ^^^ 
5^Cj)u» (Jy£ oa> 

^ ^-ij> c^==l? 


^ ^ ^j^| tAiQ-'yi-' ® Whoever follows the Messenger by fulfilling 

his instructions and avoiding his prohibitions has 
actually followed Allah. If anyone turns away from 
following you, O Messenger, do not feel sad about 
it, because I have not sent you as a guard to watch 
over what they do. I am the One Who will watch 
them and hold them to account for their actions. 
(Sj§S> The hypocrites say to you, ‘We follow your in¬ 
struction and we will act with obedience’. Yet when 
^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ they leave you, a group of them secretly plan the 

^'Uc 0 P* °PP° site of what they said to you. Allah knows their 

planning and He will recompense them according¬ 
ly. So turn away from them and pay no attention, as 
they will not harm you at all. Surrender your matter 
to Allah and rely on Him alone for He is sufficient 
for you as a Guardian to watch over your affairs and 
take care of you. 

(jp Why do these people not reflect over the Qur’an 
and study it until they realise that it contains no dif¬ 
ferences or inconsistency, so that they can accept 
the truth of what you brought? Had it been from 
anyone other than Allah, they would have found 
inconsistencies in its rulings and differences in its 
meanings. 

@ Whenever there comes a public matter com¬ 
prising safety and happiness for the Muslims, or 
matters of fear and sadness, the hypocrites rush 
to spread its news amongst the people. If they had 
waited and referred the matter to Allah’s Messen¬ 
ger (peace be upon him) and to those in charge of 
their affairs, those who are able to reason and draw 
conclusions would know what is to be done with 
respect to spreading such news or concealing it. If 
it were not for Allah’s grace and mercy on you, almost all of you would have followed the whisperings of Satan. 

(S§p Fight, O Prophet, in Allah’s path to raise His Word. You will not be questioned about or held accountable for others. 
You are only responsible to fight yourself and to urge the believers to do so. Perhaps Allah will push back the force of the 
disbelievers by your fighting. Allah is stronger in force and more severe in punishment. 

(jP Whoever intercedes or directs another person to some good them in a manner containing no sin or oppression, will 
receive a share of the reward of the good outcome; and whoever makes a bad intercession, which contains sin or oppres¬ 
sion, will receive a share of the sin. Allah watches everything that a person does and will reward him accordingly. So if 
you become a means of goodness, you will receive a share in that good; and if you become a means of doing evil, you 
will be guilty for a part of it. 

{jP When anyone offers a greeting of peace to you, then respond to him with something better than what he offered or 
return a similar greeting to him. To respond with something better is more virtuous. Allah keeps watch over what you do 
and He will reward each person according to his actions. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Reflecting over the noble Qur’an creates certainty of its being Allah’s revelation, because it is free of inconsistencies 
and the superiority of its laws will become clear. 

2. It is unlawful to spread news that creates instability to the security of the Muslims or spread fear amongst them. 

3. Discussions about the affairs of the Muslims and related public matters must be done by people of knowledge and 
those in authority. 

4. It is recommended to make a good intercession that does not contain any sin or infringement on the rights of people; 
and it is prohibited to make any intercession which contains sin or oppression. 


c$Jk jfe J 1 



an-Nisa’ 

























\jZjjXz>- 4J^\ />*■ i (jr** 


4*M 






^ O- << ' Z 2s 

J^JpJ^jpj 'jJ-5' \j>y o& a$ S^r^ 
OjA^Sl 


@ Allah is the One Who alone deserves to be wor¬ 
shipped. He will gather every single one of you 
on the Day of Judgement, about which there is 
no doubt, in order to reward you for your actions. 

There is no one more truthful in speech than Allah. 

<j§) Why is it, O believers, that you have become 
two groups differing over how to deal with the 
hypocrites? One group wants to fight against them 
because of their disbelief and another group wants 
to leave them because of their faith. You should not 
disagree over them for Allah has returned them to 
disbelief and misguidance because of their actions. 

Do you wish to guide those whom Allah has not 
shown the truth? If Allah misguides anyone, you 
will never find a way to guide such a person. 
fj| The hypocrites wish that you disbelieve in what 
was revealed to you as they have done, so that you 
can be equal to them in disbelief. Due to their an¬ 
imosity, do not take them as friends until they mi¬ 
grate in Allah’s path; hence indicating their faith. If 
they turn away and continue with their bad actions, 
then seize them and kill them wherever you find 
them. Do not take from them any friend to help you 
with your affairs nor anyone to assist you against 
your enemies. 

^ But you cannot act like this with those of them 
who join a people with whom you have a peace 
treaty or those who come to you reluctant to fight 
against you or their own people. If Allah willed to 
give them power over you, He would have done so 
and they would have fought you. Therefore, accept 
the safety that Allah has given you and do not inter¬ 
fere with them by killing or taking any one of them 
as captives. If they stay away without fighting you and they come to you to make peace, then Allah has not given you any 
authority to fight them or take any of them as prisoners. 

@) You, O believers, will find another group of hypocrites who pretend to have faith when they are before you in order 
to protect themselves; but they display their disbelief when they are with their people, so that they are safe from them 
as well. Whenever they are called to disbelief in Allah and to ascribe partners to Him, they plunge into it. These are the 
ones, if they do not keep away from fighting you or if they do not make peace with you and restrain themselves, to seize 
and kill wherever you find them. These are the ones whom Allah has given you a clear authority for seizing and killing 
them because they are treacherous. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The occurrence of the Final Hour and the ressurection after death is the truth in which there is no doubt. It is Allah’s 
true promise. 

2. The verses explain how to deal with hypocrites according to the situation and what is best. 

3. Migration in Allah’s path is one of the most noticeable features of the believers and displays the reality of their faith. 

4. Striving in Allah’s path will expose the hypocrites, as they will try to make excuses to remain behind. 





















{f§5 It is unlawful for a believer to kill another be¬ 
liever, unless it occurs by mistake. If anyone kills a 
believer by mistake, he must free a believing slave 
as a compensation for his action. The relatives of 
the killer, who inherit from him, will be responsi¬ 
ble for the blood money to be handed over to the 
successors of the victim, unless the successors give 
up the right. 

If the victim belonged to a people at war with you, 
but he was a believer, then the killer must free a 
believing slave and no blood money will be owed. 
If the victim was not a believer but belonged to a 
people with whom you have a treaty, such as disbe¬ 
lievers living in an Islamic state, the relatives of the 
killer, who inherit from him, will be responsible for 
blood money to be handed over to the successors of 
the victim and the killer must free a believing slave 
as compensation for his action. If he cannot find 
anyone to free or he cannot afford the price, then he 
must fast continuously for two consecutive months 
so that Allah accepts his repentance for what he has 
done. Allah knows the actions of His servants and 
their intentions; and He is Wise in His legislation 
and planning. 

@ If anyone kills a believer, deliberately intend¬ 
ing to do so, his recompense will be Hell to live 
there eternally. Allah will be angry with him, dis¬ 
tance him from His mercy, and will prepare for him 
a great punishment for committing such a serious 
crime. 

The belief of the Ahl as-Sunnah wa’l-Jama’ah is 
that if the killer is a believing Muslim, he will not 
literally remain in Hell eternally; but he will be 
punished in it for a long period and will then be removed from there through Allah’s grace. 

@ O you who have faith in Allah and follow His Messenger, when you go out to fight in Allah’s path, be sure about the 
case of those you are fighting. Do not say to the person who displays something indicating that he is a believer, ‘You are 
not a believer! You only displayed Islam out of fear for your life and wealth’; so that you then kill him in order to get the 
trivial goods of the world, such as the booty you acquire from this person after killing him. Yet Allah has much provision 
that is better and greater than this. 

In the past you were also like this person: hiding your faith from the people. Then Allah favoured you with Islam and 
protected your lives. So be careful, as Allah knows well what you do. Nothing is hidden from Him and He will reward 
you for your actions. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The Qur’an declares the sanctity of a believer’s life and prohibits violation of it, with a warning of the most severe 
punishment for such a crime. 

2. The person who kills a believer by mistake will have to make amends by freeing a believing slave and paying monetary 
compensation to the successors of the victim. 

3. Allah, in His sacred law, has given a victim’s successors the right to pardon a killer and give up the blood money. 

4. It is necessary to be careful when fighting and not to be hasty in judging people - in order to ensure that an innocent 
person is not attacked. 

5. When making a judgement about people, their outside appearance is accepted and given preference. If a person pro¬ 
nounces their acceptance of Islam, this must be accepted and he must be treated as a believer. His inside condition should 
be left for Allah to judge. 



















9 ^ 

J^b ^S&$^3 2^) $ £yu^2J \ jp 

\jLxAJ jjwQ iT^rsO \^^>\S^\ f rU*L^ \ ^\pt * ^Xj^>l3\ 

aSCjAJ \ j^3_^ i yl^\o^3 

<Je )^' ^ ^j 


@ Those believers who remain behind from striv¬ 
ing in Allah’s path - besides those who have an ex¬ 
cuse, such as sickness - are not equal to those who 
strive in Allah’s path, spending their wealth and 
giving their time. Allah has given those who strive 
in His path a rank above those who remain behind. 

Those who strive, as well as those who remain be¬ 
hind with a valid excuse, shall receive the reward 
they deserve. Allah has preferred those who strive 
over those who sit back by giving them a greater 
reward from Him. 

(jp) This reward will be ranks of loftiness and posi¬ 
tions in the Paradise, one above the other, together 
with forgiveness of their sins and mercy. Allah is al¬ 
ways Forgiving and Merciful towards His servants. 

@ When the angels take the souls of those who 
wrong themselves by not migrating from the land 
of disbelief to the land of Islam, the angels say to 
them at that time, while reprimanding them, ‘What 
was the status of your religion that you did not mi¬ 
grate?’ They reply, presenting the excuse, ‘We were 
weak and powerless, and we could not defend our¬ 
selves’. The angels again criticise them, ‘Were not 
the lands of Allah spacious enough for you to leave 
the place you were in order to save your religion 
and yourselves from humiliation and domination?’ 

The end of those who did not migrate will be the 
fire of Hell, where they will settle. What an evil 
place of return it will be for them! This is because 
their failure to migrate, despite being able to do so, 
indicates that they were not true in their Islam. 

Those weak ones with genuine excuses - wheth¬ 
er they were men, women or children - are exclud¬ 
ed from this warning, because they had no way to remove the oppression and domination, and they could not find any 
way out. 

@ Perhaps Allah will pardon such people through His mercy and grace. Allah always pardons His servants and forgives 
those who repent to Him. 

After giving this warning for not migrating, despite having the ability, Allah then gives encouragement for migration in 
the following verse: 

|f| Whoever migrates from the land of disbelief to the land of Islam in order to gain Allah’s pleasure will find a much 
better place in the land they migrated to, in comparison to the land they left. In this new land, they will receive honour and 
much provision. Whoever leaves their home as migrants to Allah and His Messenger and then pass away before reaching 
the land they are migrating to, their reward shall definitely be with Allah, even though they did not reach the land of 
migration. Allah is Forgiving and Merciful to those of His servants who repent to Him. 

(jf| When you travel in the land, there is no sin on you if you shorten the prayer from four units to two units of prayer, if 
you fear that the disbelievers will harm you. The disbelievers are open enemies to you, O believers. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The verses show the superiority of striving in Allah’s path and the great reward that those who do so will be given, 
having been exclusively promised high ranks in Paradise. 

2. Those with reasonable excuses are not required to strive in Allah’s path; yet they will receive a reward based on their 
good intentions. 

3. The verses show the virtue of migrating to an Islamic land and its necessity for those who are able to do so and who 
fear for their religion in their homeland. 

4. The prayer may be shortened when travelling. 



cytj * 

(A? V 4.-4444.4^ 4 I 




m 


an-Nisa’ 























\^J^dL\i^^4^>c\ju\ \$L^\l\j S^jJ^Ji 




| 5jt^|^3jfejJy>oJi2ii^ 

^ L)\jyL^ X^j aV^ j^=====c^ J 

jI^====c^>cL^^ \Jk^£> C)\j^z*£r===>j\cyt^s'^ 

^ ^ XL ^ 9 ^ £ 

l^5^l5^o^b\^6oi^&J 
ys3^XCS^\ ^\y^t\0cSp^9 

3^j ioi\ ^\1 jj\ \^ d$J 



|p When you, O Messenger, are with them in the 
army, fighting the enemy, and you wish to lead 
them in prayer, then divide the army into two 
groups: one group should stand and pray with you, 
keeping their weapons with them during the prayer, 
whilst the other group guards you. When the first 
group has completed one unit of prayer with the 
Imam, it must complete the rest of the prayer on its 
own, and then go to the back to face the direction 
of the enemy. Then the other group, which was on 
guard and which has not prayed as yet, should come 
and pray one unit of prayer with the leader. When 
the leader completes the prayer with the salam, 
they should complete the balance of their prayer 
on their own. They should be careful of the enemy 
and keep their weapons with them. The disbelievers 
wish that you become unmindful of your weapons 
and your goods when you are in prayer, so that they 
can attack you in a single assault. There is no sin 
on you to put down your weapons when you are in 
difficulty because of rain, illness, and the like, but 
be careful of the enemy as much as possible. Allah 
has prepared for the disbelievers a punishment that 
will humiliate them. 

|f| When you, O believers, have finished the prayer, 
then remember Allah by glorifying Him by saying 
‘Subhan Allah’, praising Him by saying ‘Alham- 
dulillah’ and declaring His Oneness by saying ‘La 
ilaha illallah’. This is to be done however possible, 
whether you are standing, sitting or lying on your 
sides. When the fear is gone and you are safe, then 
establish the prayer by fulfilling all its articles, ob¬ 
ligations and recommendations, as you have been 


instructed. 

Prayer is an obligation on the believers that is linked to particular times and may not be delayed without a valid reason 
when one is a resident. However, when you are travelling you are allowed to join and shorten prayers. 

@ Do not become weak and lazy, O believers, in pursuing your disbelieving enemy. If you are suffering pain because 
of the killing and injury that afflicts you, then they too are suffering the same pain as well. So do not let their patience 
be greater than yours, because you have hope of reward, help and support from Allah, which they cannot hope for. Allah 
knows the conditions of His servants and is Wise in His planning and legislation. 

(jf| I have sent down to you, O Messenger, the Qur’an, which contains the truth, so that you can clarify matters and judge 
between the people in accordance with what Allah has taught and inspired you with, and not according to your whims 
and fancy. Do not be one to defend those who betray their own selves and their promises against those who demand their 
rights from them. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The verse describes the manner and rules relating to prayer at the time of fear (salat Al-khawf). 

2. A believer is instructed to adopt normal worldly means in all circumstances, and is not excused from doing so even at 
the time of worship. 

3. A person should remember Allah at all times, as this gives life to the heart and brings spiritual tranquility. 

4. Prayer must be established at its set times without any delay. 

5. It is prohibited to show weakness and laziness when fighting the enemy and it is necessary to be patient at this time. 





















ljjA> ^L^tZS^}_9 (Jr* j \zi\ ? >A \^jj\ \5>\j&- 
Jj^ \ ^ ^yt^j^Jr^ Lq ryt 

^ 4j^\ -\j^~ ^ti^j, fl »1 ^ j4^vj 2J\ c-^-^ 



|p Seek forgiveness and pardon from Allah. Al¬ 
lah is Forgiving and Merciful towards those of His 
servants who repent to Him. 

HI Do not argue on behalf of any person who com¬ 
mits a sin denying it, until you come to know more 
about the matter. Allah does not love these deceitful 
liars. 

HI When committing sin, they hide from people 
out of fear and shame; but they cannot hide from 
Allah. He is with them and knows what they do. 

Nothing is hidden from Him when they secretly 
plan to say things that He is not pleased with, such 
as defending a sinner or falsely accusing an inno¬ 
cent person. Allah surrounds them and knows what 
they do secretly and openly. Nothing is hidden from 
Him and He will repay them for their actions. 

|p You - O those concerned with the matter of 
these people who commit sin - argued on behalf 
of them in the world in order to establish their in¬ 
nocence and protect them from the punishment; but 
who will argue with Allah for them on the Day of 
Judgement when He knows their real condition? 

Who will be their representative in the matter on 
that day? Without any doubt, no one will be able 
to do that. 

(|J| If anyone does an evil action or wrongs them¬ 
selves by committing sins, and then they ask for 
forgiveness from Allah, regretfully admitting their 
sin and leaving it, they will find that Allah is always 
ready to forgive their sins and show them mercy. 

UJ) Those who commit a minor or major sin will 
have to face the punishment themselves. No one 
else will be held responsible. Allah knows the ac¬ 
tions of His servants and is Wise in His planning and legislation. 

HI If a person does a wrong action unintentionally or a sin intentionally and then accuses an innocent person of the same, 
they have taken on themselves a serious lie and a clear sin by acting in that manner. 

HI If it were not for Allah’s grace in protecting you, O Messenger, a group of these people who deceive themselves would 
have tried to mislead you from the truth and you would have passed an unfair judgement. In reality, they only mislead 
their own selves, because they will have to face the consequences of their crime of misleading others. 

Allah has revealed the Qur’an and Sunna to you and He has taught you guidance and light which you did not know be¬ 
fore. Allah’s grace on you, by giving you prophethood and protecting you, is great. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. It is prohibited to defend and argue for those in the wrong, because that amounts to assisting them in sin and oppression. 

2. The true believer should fear, respect and be ashamed before Allah more than he is before anyone else. 

3. Allah’s mercy and forgiveness is open to the person who wrongs himself, no matter what he did, if he is sincere in his 
repentance and he leaves the sin. 

4. The verse warns against accusing an innocent person of a crime he did not commit and tells us that the person who 
does so is guilty of a serious lie and sin. 


- 09 ^ ^ „ <i ^ X 

90 


I ^ 4j^\(j-i 


4ji' 5 l^==S> 






















J£3\i 









I ‘ ‘ £ ^lW>\ eL*i;^ 


L^laJjaioj ^\^^j\j^)\J 

0 W ^ \N i 2 ^ cJi Q^-Aj o\j$) ^ - 

^3^3^ iu^A aSlii (2^\-X-^^ ^ | 


@ There is no good or benefit in much of the se¬ 
cret talk that people engage in, unless their speech 
includes an encouragement towards charity, good 
actions brought by the sacred law or those good 
actions known and approved off by people, or call¬ 
ing towards reconciliation between arguing parties. 
Whoever does such good, whilst seeking Allah’s 
pleasure, He shall give them a great reward. 

@ Whoever opposes and disobeys what the Mes¬ 
senger has brought after the truth has become clear 
to them, and follows a path other than that of the 
believers, I will leave them with what they have 
chosen; and I will not bring them to the truth, since 
they have deliberately turned away. I will then enter 
them into the fire of Hell to suffer in its heat. What 
an evil place to return to! 

@) Allah does not forgive the crime of associating 
partners with Him, for anyone who does so and dies 
in that state will live eternally in the fire of Hell. 
He may forgive all other sins besides associating 
partners with Him for whomever He wills if such 
people die committing those sins without repent¬ 
ance, out of His mercy and grace. Whoever associ¬ 
ates anything as a partner with Allah has gone far 
away from the truth, as he has made the creation 
equal with the Creator. 

@ Instead of Allah, the idolators in Makkah wor¬ 
ship female idols which were named with feminine 
names, such as al-Lat and al-‘Uzza, which can nei¬ 
ther benefit nor harm anyone. In reality, they only 
worship Satan, who rebelled and sinned against his 
Lord, as he is the one who instructed them to wor¬ 
ship the idols. 

HI It was for this reason that Allah distanced Satan from His mercy. Satan then took an oath before his Lord saying: I will 
take a set portion of Your servants, whom I will mislead from the truth. 

(|!| He also said: I will block them from your straight path. I will give them hopes with false promises that will make their 
misguidance seem attractive. I will instruct them to cut the ears of cattle, forbid that which Allah has made lawful, and 
change Allah’s creation and the natural disposition He made within all creatures. 

Whoever takes Satan as a friend to follow suffers a clear loss by doing so. 

(Jf| Satan makes false promises and gives them false hopes. In reality, he only promises them lies and inspires in them 
mere hopes that have no reality. 

{§J The final place for those who follow the footsteps and orders of Satan will be the fire of Hell, from which they will 
find no place to escape to. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. There is no good in most private discussions held by people, which often consist of sin, with very little discussion about 
goodness and generosity. 

2. The end result of opposition to the Messenger (peace be upon him) and going against the way of the believers is being 
distanced from Allah and entering Hell. 

3. Every sin, depending on Allah’s will, may be forgiven, besides the sin of associating partners with Allah, which Allah 
will never forgive if one did not repent from it in the wordly life. 

4. Satan’s goal is to turn people away from the worship of Allah. One of his main methods of doing this is to make false¬ 
hood seem attractive by deceptive hopes and false promises. 

















^ £ Cjt^j 

4^( llcj \ jS\ \ 14 ^ Cjt ^J^- 




0)jy^^3 IS15 (jt $ -L^Slj 

^y^<p\J\ 

l^J0\^> ^ 4J^L\ c^Jlij\i 

99 * >'>' \ > 

7^\3 ^ 

$k 30 ' 


«|jg 0^==^( W )^3 S ^ ^ l3.Wj (j^L* gj|» 


After Allah mentioned the reward of the followers 
of Satan, He mentioned the reward of the followers 
of the messengers in the following verse: 

|p I will enter those who have faith in Me and do 
good actions that bring them close to Me into gar¬ 
dens with palaces overlooking flowing streams, 
where they will live eternally. This is a promise 
from Allah who is true in His promise. No one is 
more true then Him in His statements and promises. 

|p The issue of salvation and success O Muslims 
is not dependent on mere hopes and desires, nor 
in what the People of the Scripture hope and wish 
for; rather, it is based on action. Whoever, from 
amongst you, does an evil action will be reward¬ 
ed for it on the Day of Judgement. They will not 
find any friend to bring any benefit to them nor any 
helper to protect them from harm. 

|p Any person, whether male or female, who does 
good actions and has true faith in Allah will enter 
Paradise, because they combined faith with prac¬ 
tice. The reward of their actions will not be reduced 
in the least, not even to the extent of a speck on a 
date stone. 

|p No one is better in religion than the one who 
surrenders to Allah outwardly and inwardly, does 
good actions and follows the religion of Abraham, 
which forms the basis of the religion of Muhammad 
(peace be upon him): inclining away from idola¬ 
try and disbelief to monotheism and faith. Allah 
chose His Prophet Abraham as a close friend from 
amongst all of His creation. 

|p The dominion of everything in the heavens and 
the earth is Allah’s alone. Allah, with His knowl¬ 
edge, power and planning, surrounds everything in His creation. 

|p They ask you, O Messenger, about the rights and duties of women. Say: Allah will clarify for you what you have 
asked and what is recited in the Qur’an with respect to orphan girls in your care, to whom you do not give the dowry and 
the inheritance that Allah has ordained for them; and whom you do not wish to marry, yet you prevent them from getting 
married because of your greed for their wealth. 

He also explains to you that your duty with respect to minor children who are helpless is to give them their due right of 
inheritance and not to wrong them by seizing their wealth. He explains to you the duty of being fair to orphans and look¬ 
ing after their best interests in this world and the Afterlife. Allah knows of any good you do towards orphans and others, 
and will reward you for it. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The reward that is with Allah cannot be achieved by simple hopes and claims. Instead, a person must have faith and 
do good actions. 

2. Rewards and recompense are linked to the action: if a person does evil, he will be requited for it. However if a person 
does good, he will be given something better as a reward. 

3. The test for the acceptance of actions with Allah is sincerity and following the sacred law. 

4. Islam has given great importance to the rights of weak groups, such as women and minors. It has prohibited infringing 
on such rights and made it a duty to give consideration to the interests of such individuals in the light of the laws it has 
set-down. 


£>\j o;ij ^ 


A) 


3. 


an-Nisa’ 




Part 5 






















a* ai 

| ^ok 5 ^\^- X ® “ 


^L> l^=» 4J^ O^ ^£>cL^5 AJh^u^ \^=» 

4)b\ 

\ ^La 4j^_$ c^ i l^L-^ ^ 4j^^ qI ^ -=^j 

(j^cj3^==J \ ££j5 \ ~^L? OfS^ L 3^ 9 

^o^I^^====6 l)& 5 o\jLiss^i? J> 



If a woman fears that her husband will ignore 
her and lose interest in her, there is no sin in them 
reaching a compromise where the woman gives up 
some of the rights due to her, such as maintenance 
and accommodation. In such a case, reconciliation 
is better than divorce. 

Souls have been naturally created with greed and 
^ ^ miserliness, and will not be keen to give up any 

jy-C5^\ VpLLxJ^ r p i *==> j?> r 'S ht - Tl ' e couple should, therefore, deal with this 

® ^ " characteristic by training the soul to be forgiving 

and generous. If you do good in your affairs and are 
mindful of Allah, by fulfilling His instructions and 
avoiding His prohibitions, then Allah knows what 
you do. Nothing is hidden from Him and He will 
reward you accordingly. 

(j|| You, husbands, will not be able to be completely 
fair to your wives with respect to your affection, 
even if you tried to do so. This is due to circum¬ 
stances and factors beyond your control. So do not 
incline fully away from the one you do not love and 
leave her like a woman suspended, who does not 
have a husband to fulfill her right and nor is she 
unmarried so that she may seek to marry another. If 
you set things right between yourselves, by giving 
the wife her due right and being mindful of Allah in 
that regard, then Allah will be Forgiving and Mer¬ 
ciful towards you. 

Ifl If a couple separate by divorce (issued by the 
man) or khuT (initiated by the woman), then Al¬ 
lah will make each one of them rich through His 
vast Bounty: He will enrich the man with a wife 
that is more suitable for him; and He will enrich the 
woman with a husband that is more suitable for her. 
Allah’s bounty and mercy is vast. He is Wise in His planning and decree. 

(0) The dominion of everything in the heavens and the earth, and all that is between them, is Allah’s alone. He had in¬ 
structed the People of the Scripture, the Jews and Christians, and has instructed you, O believers, to fulfil Allah’s orders 
and avoid His prohibitions. If you reject this instruction you only harm yourselves, because Allah is in no need of your 
obedience, as everything in the heavens and earth is His. He is in no need of any of His creation. He is the One Who is 
praised for all His attributes and actions. 

(Jfl The dominion of everything in the heavens and the earth is Allah’s alone and He alone deserves to be obeyed. Allah 
is sufficient as One Who takes care of all the affairs of His creation. 

{§| If He wills He can destroy you, O people, and bring others besides you who will obey Him and not go against Him. 
Allah has full power to do that. 

|I| Whoever from amongst you, O people, intends to only gain the reward of this world by their actions, they should know 
that with Allah is the reward of this world and the Afterlife, and they should seek the reward of them both from Him. 
Allah hears your statements and knows your actions, and He will reward you for them. 

Beneficial Points: 

1. It is recommended that reconciliation be reached between a married couple who are in dispute. This should be done by 
giving up some rights in order to maintain the marriage bond. 

2. Allah has ordered the husband with more than one wife to be fair between his wives, especially in material things which 
are within the husband’s control. However, the sacred law overlooks those non-material things in which fairness is not 
possible, such as love and inclination. 

3. There is no harm if a couple separate when it is no longer possible to live together. 

4. A comprehensive piece of advice to humankind - every single one of them - is to be mindful of Allah by fulfilling His 
instructions and avoiding His prohibitions. 


\^q %\^\J 






















j A^i^33^ 


S5»--J* 

si4rl 




3j~^ c£3j\ c_jH^==d \j 4j^\j ^X>a\ 


5j c 


@ O you who have faith in Allah and follow His 
Messenger, uphold justice in all conditions: testify¬ 
ing to the truth with respect to every person, even 
if that means you have to admit a right due on you, 
your parents or your relatives. A person’s being 
poor or rich should not make you give or avoid giv¬ 
ing testimony, because Allah is closer to the poor or 
rich person than you are; and He knows what is in 
their best interests. Do not be led by your desires in 
your testimony, so that you do not deviate from the 
truth in it. If you distort the testimony by giving it 
inaccurately or if you turn away from fulfilling it, 
then Allah knows what you do. 

|f| O believers, be firm in your faith in Allah, His 
Messenger, the Qur’an which He revealed to His 
Messenger and the books He revealed to the mes¬ 
sengers before him. Anyone who disbelieves in Al¬ 
lah, His angels, His books, His messengers and the 
Day of Judgement has strayed far from the straight 
path. 

Ip) Those who repeatedly disbelieve after accept¬ 
ing faith - by entering into the faith, then leaving 
it, entering into it again, then leaving again, and so 
on - and then continue in disbelief until they die as 
disbelievers, Allah will not forgive their sins and 
nor will He bring them to the straight path that leads 
to Him. 

(|f| O Prophet, announce to the hypocrites - who 
show themselves as believers on the outside, but 
hide disbelief inside - that on the Day of Judgement 
Allah will give them a painful punishment. 

(jf| This punishment is because they took the dis¬ 
believers as their helpers and supporters instead of 
the believers. How strange that they took them as allies!. Do they search for assistance and protection with them? All 
assistance and protection belongs only to Allah and comes only from Him. 

HI Allah has already revealed to you, O believers, in the noble Qur’an that if you are sitting in a gathering and you hear a 
person disbelieving in Allah’s words starting to make fun of them, then you must not sit with them and you must leave the 
gathering until they begin speaking about something other than disbelief and making fun of Allah’s words. If you sit with 
them while you hear them disbelieving in and mocking at Allah’s words, then you are like them in not following Allah’s 
instruction, because you went against Allah by sitting with them just as they went against Him by disbelieving in Him. 
Allah will gather the hypocrites, who show themselves as Muslims on the outside but hide disbelief inside themselves, 
and the disbelievers together in the fire of Hell on the Day of Judgement. 

^ Beneficial Points: 

1. It is necessary to be just when passing judgement between people and when giving testimony, even if the right is owed 
by the person himself or any of his relatives. 

2. A believer must work hard to do actions with his heart and limbs that will increase his faith and make it firm in his 
heart. 

3. The verses show the great danger that the hypocrites pose to Islam and the Muslims. It is for this reason that Allah has 
warned them of the most severe punishment in the Afterlife. 

4. If a believer is not able to refute a person who speaks against Allah’s words and the sacred law, he is not permitted to 
remain sitting with such a person. 























tsfeL 




a)' ojy* 


\ • \ 


^ l_3 ^29>v^ =d U[^ ^ 

lj5 Li <Ljy^> ^ 

I 4^\< > jAJaJ^. ^ \oi^^L^ 

(l^i)^(J,L^=^ S^Ly^ (JLi^S 
I eiLii ^ -Xti] ^ 35 o^I -XJ 0 ^as ^ 

C <? ^ _»» c 0 9 ^ y* Q 

0 ^(^) L^J® \liSLi^====?-^ 

\fy^>j^ J^Li\ ^ 4^5-^ 

5»y*^ I 


JLA.Q-.\yi.\ @ Those who wait to see what happens to you - 

whether good or bad; or if Allah gives you victo¬ 
ry and gains of war - say, ‘Were we not present 
together with you?’ in order to get some gains of 
war. If the disbelievers have some success, they say 
to them, ‘Did we not protect you from and defend 
you against the believers by assisting you instead 
of them’. Allah will judge between all of you on the 
Day of Judgement: rewarding the believers by giv¬ 
ing them entry into Paradise and the hypocrites by 
sending them to the lowest level of the fire of Hell. 
Allah, in His grace, will never give the disbelievers 
the upper hand over the believers. Instead, the be¬ 
lievers will be the winners in the end. 

HI The hypocrites try to deceive Allah by showing 
themselves as believers on the outside while hiding 
disbelief inside. Allah, in turn, deceives them be¬ 
cause He protects their lives despite knowing about 
their disbelief. In the Afterlife, He has prepared the 
most severe punishment for them. When they stand 
for prayer they do so lazily, with reluctance. They 
only remember Allah a little when they see the be¬ 
lievers. 

@ These hypocrites are wandering and confused. 
On both the inside and the outside, they are not with 
the believers, nor with the disbelievers. On the out¬ 
side, they are with the believers; but inside, they 
are with the disbelievers. Whoever Allah misleads, 
you, O Messenger, will never find a way to guide 
such a person. 

@ O you who have faith in Allah and follow His 
Messenger, do not take the disbelievers as your 
close friends instead of the believers. By doing so, 
do you wish to give Allah clear evidence against you, proving that you are deserving of punishment? 

(jp Allah will place the hypocrites in the lowest place in the fire of Hell on the Day of Judgement. You will not find any¬ 
one to defend them against the punishment. 

Ip But those who turn to Allah repenting from their hypocrisy, correct themselves, hold on to Allah’s pledge and are sin¬ 
cere to Him in their practice, without showing off, such people will be with the believers in this world and the Afterlife. 
Allah will give the believers a huge reward. 

Ip There is no need for Allah to punish you if you are thankful to Him and have faith in Him. He is the One Who is Kind 
and Merciful. He only punishes you for your sins. If you do good actions, are thankful to Him for His favours and have 
faith in Him both inside and outside, He will never punish you. Allah is Grateful to the person who admits His favours; 
and He knows the faith of His creation. He will reward every person for his actions. 

^ Beneficial Points: 

1. The verses describe the attributes of the hypocrites, such as their greed for their share, whether it is with the believers 
or the disbelievers. 

2. One of the main characteristic of the hypocrites is their wandering and confusion as regards to Faith. In reality, they 
are neither with the believers, nor the disbelievers. 

3. The verses strongly prohibit taking disbelievers as friends instead of believers. 

4. Having faith and doing good actions is the best means by which a person can save himself from Allah’s punishment 
in the Afterlife. 


























{J *Si ^ Cjt 4ji\ <1^^J * 

^ o ^ ^ c* ^ ^ ^ ^ o ^ ^ ^ 

u^i**-*5j\ oJij^\\J^\jjj: ili\ 

O5y^^o^ * ^ol-^^ 4J^ O^ %y^ 

O^ybj * ^DJ ^C^i^jp4o^ 6j Jjjl? 

UA ;J\ < )J> Jo^ij^v? ^ ly^> 

^ TL** 9 

b AAp\^li>- ojyi^O \ 9 jP> dLIi}\ (j£} 3^ 

<ii5 


r *M 

'4>34J 



||| Allah does not like evil statements to be made 
public. He dislikes that and warns against it. How¬ 
ever, if a person is wronged, he may mention the 
evil in order to complain against the guilty party, to 
call against him and to retaliate with similar words. 

In this case, too, it is better for the one who was 
wronged to be patient and not to disclose the matter. 

Allah hears your statements and knows your inten¬ 
tions, so be careful of saying or intending anything 
evil. 

HI If you expose or hide a good statement or action, 
or if you pardon the person who does bad to you, 

Allah is Forgiving and Powerful. So let forgive¬ 
ness be part of your character in order that Allah 
forgives you. 

(jf| Those who disbelieve in Allah and His messen¬ 
gers, and who want to make a distinction between 
Allah and His messengers by believing in Allah yet 
rejecting His messengers by saying, ‘We accept 
some messengers and reject others’, and they want 
to take a path between disbelief and belief, thinking 
that this will save them. 

(Jfl Those who follow such a stance as regards their 
faith are in fact disbelievers, for disbelieving in 
some of the messengers is similar to disbelief in 
Allah and all His messengers. Allah has prepared 
a humilating punishment for all disbelievers on the 
Day of Rising as a just recompense for their delib¬ 
erate refusal to follow the faith as required of them. 

After Allah mentioned the punishment of the disbe¬ 
lievers, He mentions the reward of the believers in 
the following verse: 

(jl| Those who believe in Allah, declare His One¬ 
ness, do not associate any partner with Him, accept all of His messengers and do not make a distinction between any of 
them as the disbelievers do, Allah will give such people a great reward for their faith and good actions. Allah is Forgiving 
and Merciful towards the servant who repents to Him. 

HI The Jews ask you, O Messenger, to bring down to them at once a Book from the heaven, as it occurred with Moses, to 
prove your truthfulness. Do not be surprised at them as their predecessors had asked Moses for something much greater 
when they asked him to show them Allah openly. As a consequence for what they said they were seized by a thunderbolt. 
Then Allah brought them back to life and they went on to worship the calf instead of Allah after clear proofs came to 
them indicating Allah’s Oneness and Him being the only One worthy of worship. Then He forgave them and gave Moses 
clear evidence against his people. 

(j|| I frightened them by raising the mountain over them in order to take a firm promise from them to practice what it 
contained and we said to them, ‘Enter the gate of Jerusalem in prostration by bowing your heads’. They entered dragging 
their buttocks. I also said to them, ‘Do not disobey Me by fishing on the Saturday’; but they rebelled and went against 
My command. I took a firm promise from them for this, but they broke their promise. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. A person who is wronged may speak about the wrong and the person who wronged him to someone who can help him 
get his right, even if this means saying something the wrongdoer will not like. 

2. It is better for a person who is wronged to have patience instead of speaking about the wrong. The reward for this will 
be Allah’s forgiveness. 

3. It is not permissible to make a distinction between the messengers by having faith in some and not others. Instead, it 
is necessary to accept all of them. 

4. The verses show the methods the Jews used to disbelieve the messengers by asking them for impossible things and by 
breaking the promise taken from them by the Lord of the Worlds. 


\%j\ Vp lib q* 

(^) iJL^lAiAA 

Part 6 ^ 


an-Nisa’ 


102 

























a) i 






4j3 C^\%fr§y^, 






f ^l^jjsC/ 1 £f\ is^f^ ^s- d 3 jQ ^ ^ Uc$\j\, ^^jkj 

03^ l)L?A_^_ jl i^i^LaJ *j)c£\jsj 4$ 

l$£\ 

^ tl5^4j^p <3\ ^j 3 \j&\ <^0\!2^ &I3j 

Si ^ o^ol? 0 

jjili 5w cyi ji^0\3^-^0^3 



V^) \ ^ 3i3j 0 

^0£jO^^ 

1 jL^ 

==£) \ 


|p I distanced them from My mercy because they 
broke the promise that was taken from them, disbe¬ 
lieved in Allah’s words, boldly killed the prophets 
and said to Muhammad (peace be upon him), ‘Our 
hearts are covered, so we cannot understand what 
you say’ That is not the case. Instead, Allah has 
sealed their hearts so no good reaches them. They 
only have a little faith, which will not be of any use 
to them. 

(jf| And I distanced them from My mercy because 
they disbelieved and because they falsely accused 
Mary of fornication. 

HI I cursed them because they proudly, but falsely, 
said, ‘We killed the Messiah, Jesus, son of Mary, the 
messenger of Allah’. They did not kill him as they 
claimed, nor did they crucify him; but they killed 
and crucified a man whom Allah made to resemble 
Jesus, so they thought the person who was killed 
was Jesus. Those Jews who claimed to have killed 
him and those Christians who surrendered him over 
to them are in doubt and confusion regarding the 
matter. They have no knowledge, but make guesses 
that are of no worth against the truth. Truly, they did 
not kill Jesus nor crucify him. 

(jf| Instead, Allah saved Jesus from their plot and 
raised him in body and spirit to Himself. Allah is 
Mighty in His dominion and nothing can overpow¬ 
er Him. He is Wise in His planning, decisions and 
laws. 

HI There is not one of the People of the Scripture 
except that they will believe in Jesus (peace be upon 
him) before his death after he descends towards the 
end of time. On the Day of Judgement, Jesus (peace 
be upon him) will bear witness against their actions, whether agreeing with the sacred law or not. 

(jfl Because of the wrongdoings of the Jews, I prohibited them from some of the pure, edible things that used to be per¬ 
mitted for them, such as any hoofed animal and the fat in cows and sheep. This was also because they blocked themselves 
and others from Allah’s path, such that obstructing from good became a feature of theirs. 

(jf| And because of their dealing in usury after Allah had prohibited them from consuming it and because of their taking 
the wealth of people without any legitimate right. I have prepared for those of them who disbelieve a punishment causing 
pain. 

After mentioning the shortcomings of the People of the Scripture, Allah speaks of those of them who are righteous and 
says: 

(jf| But those Jews who are firm and well grounded in knowledge, and have faith, believe in the Qur’an that Allah has 
revealed to you, O Messenger, as they believe in the books that He revealed to the messengers before you (such as the 
Torah and the Gospel). They also establish the prayer, give Zakat of their wealth, accept Allah as the only One worthy 
of worship without any partner and believe in the Day of Judgement. Allah will give a great reward to those who have 
these qualities. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The Jews were cursed and distanced from Allah’s mercy due to their breaking the laws, disbelieving and killing proph¬ 
ets. 2. When hearts are sealed, they are deprived of understanding. 3. The verses show the hatred the Jews had for the 
Prophet of Allah Jesus (peace be upon him), to the extent that they attempted to kill him. 

4. Allah declared the Jews to be false in their claim of having killed the Messiah; and He clarified that the person who was 
killed was only a man who had been made to resemble the Messiah. 5. The verses explain the ignorance and confusion 
of the Christians with respect to the issue of the crucifixion and their false assumptions in that regard. 6. The verses show 
the excellence of knowledge, as the firm knowledge of some of the People of the Scripture led them to having faith in the 
Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him). 



















i5 


(>y 4jj\ pU==? !^-4 lL$ (3^ i>5 



JoO Aj>t^>- 4jii^ (J^O’i^”'^- 




© I have sent revelation to you, O Messenger, as I 
had sent revelation to the prophets before you. This 
revelation to you is not something strange or un¬ 
expected. I had sent revelation to Noah and to the 
prophets who came after him. I sent revelation to 
Abraham and his two sons, Ishmael and Isaac, and 
to Jacob, the son of Isaac, and to the Tribes (which 
refers to the prophets that were from the twelve 
tribes of the Israelites from the children of Jacob). I 
also gave David a book called the Psalms. 

(jf| I sent messengers whom I have mentioned 
to you in the Qur’an; and I also sent messengers 
whom I have not mentioned to you in the Qur’an 
for a reason. And Allah spoke to Moses without 
an intermediary in a manner that befits Him, as an 
honour to Moses. 

|p I sent messengers to give good news of a gener¬ 
ous reward for those who have faith in Allah, and to 
warn those who disbelieve in Him of a painful pun¬ 
ishment, so that people will not have any argument 
to present as an excuse against Me after I have sent 
the messengers. I am Mighty in My dominion and 
Wise in My decision. 

(jl| If the Jews disbelieve in you O Messenger, then 
Allah bears testimony to the truth of the Qur’an that 
He has revealed to you, He has revealed knowledge 
of His to His servants so that they may know what 
He willed regarding what He likes and is pleased 
with, as well as what He dislikes and condemns. 

Together with Allah’s testimony, the angels also 
bear testimony to the truth of what you brought. 

Allah’s testimony is sufficient and no one else’s 
testimony is required. 

Jf| Those who disbelieve in your prophethood and obstruct people from Islam have gone far away from the truth. 

(jf| Those who disbelieve in Allah and His messengers and wrong themselves by remaining in disbelief, Allah will not 
forgive them as long as they continue in disbelief, nor will He guide them to a path of salvation from His punishment, 
(jl| Except the path that leads to Hellfire, where they will live eternally. That is easy for Allah and nothing can hinder His 
decision. 

HI O people, the Messenger Muhammad (peace be upon him) has come to you with guidance and the true religion from 
Allah. So accept what he has brought to you, as this will be better for you in this world and the Afterlife. If you disbelieve 
in Allah, He is in no need of your faith. Your disbelief does not harm Him, because He controls everything in the heavens, 
everything in the earth and everything in between. Allah knows who deserves guidance and makes it easy for them. He 
also knows who does not deserve it and makes them blind to it. He is Wise in His words, actions, laws and decree. 

4*} Beneficial Points: 

1. Noah and Abraham were prophets and messengers and as were others from their progeny. 

2. There are other messengers besides the ones mentioned in the Qur’an. The Qur’an has not mentioned them for a reason 
known to Allah. 

3. Allah spoke directly to Moses (peace be upon them). 

4. The Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him) is comforted by being told that Allah, as well as the angels, bear witness 
to the truthfulness of his claim of prophethood. 


O* 0J 


[K 



3 an-Nisa’ 


104 

Part 6 1 



















> 






*3 \&\ 

4Jil4^2 f^-13 'pkr* cl \\p^£\ -, icp^==sj 

^\\^\JlJ\S^\^J fe&y \Jcpp%J6j 


<0 Say, O Messenger, to the Christians who re¬ 
ceived the Gospel: Do not overstep the limits in 
your religion and do not say anything but the truth 
about Allah in relation to Jesus. The Messiah, Je¬ 
sus, son of Mary, is only Allah’s messenger sent 
with the truth. He created him by His word which 
He sent with Gabriel to Mary, which was the word 
‘Be’, and he became. It was a breath from Allah 
which Gabriel blew with Allah’s instruction. So 
have faith in Allah and all His messengers without 
making a distinction between them. Do not say, 
^ ^ ‘The Allahs are three’. Avoid saying this false state- 

=J pop&J \ S}^J ^ ment and it will be better for ou in this world and 

the Afterlife. Allah is the only One Allah free of any 


£ ^ ^ ^ s ^ ^ the Alterlile. Allah is the only One Allah tree ot an) 

^ partner or child. He is Self-sufficient. The domin- 

^ i t fUrt nr»ni f n r\ W’n om/J nrnntm to i m 





\£ij o/i CjZ ^ 5 3 


ion of the heavens, the earth and whatever is in be¬ 
tween the two is His. He is sufficient as a guardian 
to carry out the affairs of His creation. 

@ Jesus, son of Mary, will never be proud and re¬ 
ject being a servant of Allah. The close angels who 
do not go against Allah’s instruction and who do as 
they are instructed will also never disregard being 
Allah’s servants. How, then, do you take Jesus as a 
Allah? How do the idolaters take angels as Allahs? 
If anyone rejects worshipping Allah and turns away 
from it, the He will gather all of them before Him 
on the Day of Rising and will recompense each one 
with what they deserve. 

Since he mentioned that He will gather them all be¬ 
fore Him, He details their reward in the following 
verse: 

(j|| Those who have faith in Allah, accept His Mes¬ 
senger and do good actions with sincerity in agree- 


an-Nisa’ 

ment with the sacred law, He will give them the reward of their actions without any reduction. In addition, He will give 
them more out of His grace and kindness. As for those who scorned Allah’s worship and obedience and were arrogant, 
He will punish them with a painful torment. Besides Allah, they will not find any friend to bring any benefit to them nor 
any helper to protect them from hann. 

@ O People, a clear proof and plain evidence, which leaves no room for excuse and removes all doubt, has come to you 
from your Lord. He has sent down to you a clear light in the form of this Qur’an, which falsehood cannot touch from any 
angle and which is a revelation from the Wise and Praised One. 

({J} Those who have faith in Allah and hold on to the Qur’an that He revealed to their Prophet, Allah will have mercy on 
them by entering them into Paradise, and He will increase their reward and raise their ranks. He will enable them to tread 
the straight path which has no crookedness: the path that leads to the gardens of Paradise. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The verses show that the Messiah and his mother were both human and that the Christians who were deviated went to 
an extreme with respect to them by claiming that they had attributes of divinity. 

2. Allah shows the falsehood of the idolatry of the Christians who believed in the Trinity, and that Allah is free of having 
any partner, likeness or equal. It is also established that Allah is unique in His Oneness of essence, names and attributes. 

3. Jesus (peace be upon him), as well as all the angels, are created servants of Allah who are not too proud to admit their 
servitude to Allah and to submit to His laws. How can they be taken as Allahs when they themselves are the servants of 
Allah? 



















a jj'ci' =j 


^ • n 




£)\_ 3jlL^==^\ (JS ^LyjC L2l£ 

J J>^ ^ 

Jcjo\ \2^0^ 

iLlij S 1^3 sy>-^\y ^jl^ 

I (0)jL^Ap J^===*£4j^\j l)\ 4J^ 0>ri 



1aa~j4* 






@ They ask you, O Messenger, to give them a 
ruling with respect to the inheritance of the person 
who dies without any direct heirs, such as a father 
or child. Say: Allah explains the ruling with respect 
to such a person: 

If a person without any parent or child dies and he 
has a full sister or a half sister, she will receive half 
of the wealth he leaves - it being her set share. 

His full brother or half brother will receive whatev¬ 
er wealth he leaves behind by way of agnation, if 
there are no stipulated heirs; yet if there are stipu¬ 
lated heirs, he will inherit the balance that remains. 

If there are two or more full sisters or half sisters, 
they will inherit two thirds as their set share. 

If there are male and female (full or half) siblings, 
they will inherit by way of agnation in accordance 
with the rule: the male receives equivalent to the 
share of two females, which means that the share of 
the male will be double that of the female. 

Allah explains to you the ruling for the person who 
dies without direct heirs, as well as other laws of 
inheritance, so that you do not go astray in this re¬ 
gard. Allah knows everything and nothing is hidden 
from Him. 

The Table (Surah Al-Ma’idah) 

Themes of the Surah: 

The topics include the fulfillment of contracts, 
obeying the sacred law and its limits, and the com¬ 
pleteness of the religion. 

Explanation: 

O you who believe in Allah, follow His Messen¬ 
ger and practice His laws, fulfil the firm promises of faith and practice that were made between you and your Creator. 
Also, fulfil the promises made with His creation in sale transactions, marriage, etc. Allah has permitted for you, out of 
His mercy, livestock animals (camels, cattle, sheep and goats), except those the prohibition of which have been read to 
you and the land game that He has prohibited you from in the state of sanctity during the pilgrimage of Hajj or Umrah. 
Allah decides to permit and prohibit as He wills in accordance with His wisdom. No one can compel Him or object to 
His decision. 

Cj$) O you who believe in Allah, follow His Messenger and practice His laws, do not violate the sanctity of those things 
that Allah has instructed you to honour. Stay away from those things that are prohibited when you are in the state of 
pilgrim sanctity, such as wearing your normal clothing, and those things that are prohibited within the Sanctuary, such 
as hunting. Do not regard fighting in the sacred months of Dhu Al-Qa‘dah, Dhu Al-Hijjah, Muharram and Rajab to be 
permissible. Do not violate the sacrificial animal by siezing it or preventing it from reaching its place of sacrifice. Do not 
violate those animals with garlands indicating that they are offerings. Do not violate those intending to go to the Sacred 
House of Allah, seeking profit in their trade and Allah’s pleasure. When you come out of the state of pilgrim sanctity and 
you leave the Sanctuary, you may hunt if you wish. The hatred for a people who prevented you from the Sacred Mosque 
should not cause you to be oppressive and unfair towards them. Help one another, O believers, to do what you have been 
instructed and to leave what you have been prohibited from. Fear Allah by holding on to His obedience and avoiding His 
disobedience. Allah’s punishment for the one who disobeys Him is severe, so be careful of it. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The laws and cases of inheritance for the person who dies without direct heirs, with a clarification of the shares of the 
heirs that arise in each case. 2. The principle of the sacred law is that it is permissible to eat all animals besides those ex¬ 
cluded with a proof of prohibition, or land game that comes before a person in the state of sanctity during the pilgrimage 
of Hajj or Umrah. 3. It is prohibited to regard as lawful those things that have been made unlawful. These include things 
prohibited when in the state of Ihram, hunting in the Sanctuary, fighting in the sacred months and violation of the sanctity 
of the sacrificial animal by taking it or by preventing it from reaching its place of sacrifice. 4. It is permissible to hunt 
after coming out of the state of pilgrim sanctity for Hajj or Umrah and after leaving the Sanctuary. 



























o}^^d\j 4j£j>z^)j J 



a^k; 



^ XL ''*° 4 +^ *\ /(*'* m ioday me disbelievers have lost hope mat 3 

j^> leave the religion of Islam, because they 
2 sis >1 ^ ^ , sL> < i ^ strength. So do not fear them, but fear M< 





(0) Allah has forbidden you from eating those an¬ 
imals that die without being ritually slaughtered. 
He has also forbidden you from spilled blood; pig’s 
meat; an animal on which other than the name of 
Allah was taken at the time of slaughter; an animal 
that was strangled or beaten to death, or one that 
fell from a high place; or an animal that was gored 
by another animal and an animal that was hunted 
by a predator, such as a lion, tiger or wolf, unless 
you reach any of these animals while they are alive 
and you slaughter them - in which case they will 
be lawful for you. He has forbidden you from those 
animals that were sacrificed for idols. 

He has also prohibited you from drawing lots to 
know whether something is destined for you or not, 
or to use as a means of making a decision when 
intending to do something or not. By doing these 
prohibited things a person is leaving obedience to 
Allah. 

Today the disbelievers have lost hope that you will 

see its 

strength. So do not fear them, but fear Me alone. 
Today I have perfected for you your religion, which 
is Islam. I have completed My apparent and hidden 
favours on you. I have selected Islam as your reli¬ 
gion, so I will not accept any other. 

If anyone is forced due to hunger to eat from an 
animal that was not slaughtered correctly, with no 
inclination to sin, there is no sin on such a person to 
do so. Allah is Forgiving and Compassionate. 
After Allah mentioned what is forbidden to con¬ 
sume, He mentioned what is allowed in the follow¬ 
ing verse: 

Cp Your companions ask you, O Messenger, what Allah has permitted them to eat. Say, O Messenger: Allah has permitted 
you to eat any food that is pure and also what is hunted by trained animals that have canines, such as dogs, cheetahs, or 
birds that have talons such as falcons. These are animals that you train to hunt as Allah has blessed you with knowledge 
of its methods, such that they follow instructions and leave something when told to do so. You may eat any game caught 
by such animals, even if they kill them, as long as you take the name of Allah when releasing them. Be mindful of Allah 
by fulfilling His instructions and staying away from His prohibitions. Allah is quick in taking account. 

@ Today Allah has allowed you to eat those things that are wholesome, and the animals slaughtered by the Jews and 
Christians who are the People of the Scripture. He has also made lawful for them animals that you slaughter. He has per¬ 
mitted you to marry free, chaste women from the believers, as well as free, chaste women from the Jews and Christians 
who received scripture before you. This is if you give them their dowries and you are trying to stay away from committing 
an immoral action, such as adultery or fornication, by taking them as lovers. Yet whosoever disbelieves in Allah and His 
laws which He has given to his slaves, then his actions are void, because the condition for good actions to be accepted 
is true faith. On the Day of Judgement, such a person will be a loser due to entering the fire of Hell, where they will live 
eternally. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. It is prohibited to eat animals that die without being slaughtered, blood that spills forth from an animal at the time of 
slaughter, the meat of the pig, animals on which other than the name of Allah was taken at the time of slaughter and any 
animal that died by strangulation, being beaten to death, falling from a high place, being gored or by being hunted by a 
wild animal. The exceptions to this rule are those animals that are found alive and are slaughtered in the manner set-down 
by the sacred law. 

2. Those animals hunted by trained animals with canines or birds with talons are lawful. 

3. Animals slaughtered by the People of the Scripture are permitted. It is also permitted to marry women from the People 
of the Scripture who are free and chaste. 



j 

fe. 
























J3\$U 




w 




o 


o^^=cS xX\ tiS-j \ y 1 -^ Cs^y >^== = ok? 

| aiioju L: 

3fk==^/AciJ* ^13 
iilz H i 

>\^J\Q\2Qjj&\^\l i 

\ X." " * < 

o XX^XX aX, 


l-' ■»*. ^ j 

0JL^ 


_ 1 O you who believe in Allah, follow His Mes- 
senger and practice His laws, when you intend to 
stand up to offer the prayer and you are in the state 
of minor ritual impurity, then perfonn ablution by 
washing your faces and then your hands together 
with the elbows, then wiping your heads and finally 
washing your feet together with the ankles. If you 
are in the state of major ritual impurity, then take a 
full bath. 

If you are sick and you fear that the sickness will 
get worse or the healing will be delayed, or if you 
are on a journey even though you are not sick, or if 
you are in the state of minor ritual impurity, such 
as after going to the toilet, or in a state of major 
ritual impurity, such as after having had sexual in¬ 
tercourse, and you do not find water to purify your¬ 
selves with, despite having searched for it, then 
make use of the ground by striking it with your 
hands and then wiping over your faces and then 
wiping your hands with it. Allah does not wish to 
make the laws difficult for you by forcing you to 
use water that may lead to harm or difficulty. He 
has therefore given you a substitute when this is not 
possible due to sickness or the lack of water. This 
is a completion of His favour on you, so that you 
give thanks for such favour and are not ungrateful. 

(0 Remember Allah’s favour upon you by guiding 
you to Islam and the promise He took from you 
when you said at the time of pledging allegiance to 
the Prophet (peace be upon him) to listen and fol¬ 
low in ease or difficulty: ‘We hear your words and 
we follow your instruction’. Be mindful of Allah by 
fulfilling His instructions, including His promises, 
and avoiding His prohibitions. Allah knows what is in the hearts and nothing is hidden from Him. 

(Sjj) O you who believe in Allah and His Messenger and follow His laws, uphold Allah’s rights over you, seeking His 
pleasure. Be witnesses for justice and not for oppression. The hatred for a people should not make you leave justice: 
justice is a requirement with a friend, as well as with an enemy, so be just with both. Justice is closer to the fear of Allah, 
and oppression is closer to disrespect against Him. Be mindful of Allah by fulfilling His instructions and avoiding His 
prohibitions. Allah knows what you do. Nothing of your actions is hidden from Him and He will repay you accordingly. 
@ Allah has made a promise to those who have faith in Allah and His messengers of forgiveness for their sins and a great 
reward which is to enter into Paradise. Allah never fails His Promise. 

^ Beneficial Points: 

1. The principle with respect to purification is that water should be used for ablution when in the state of minor ritual 
impurity or for taking a full bath when in the state of major ritual impurity. 

2. In the event of it being difficult to reach water or to use it because of an illness or due to extreme cold, then dry ablution 
(with sand) has been legislated for the removal of the state of ritual impurity (whether minor or major). 

3. The verses instruct that justice be implemented and injustice be avoided, even when dealing with opponents. 



Al-Ma’idah 




























J^=L^ o\^j£>-& ^ ^^ ==€^4$ 

ur^ 

I^S.l'CI 


@ Those who disbelieve in Allah and reject His 
verses are the companions of the fire of Hell, which 
they will enter as a punishment for their disbelief 
and rejection. They will remain in the fire of Hell 
eternally, just as a companion remains with his 
companion. 

@ O you who believe in Allah and follow His Mes¬ 
senger, remember, with your hearts and tongues, 
the favours Allah has given you, such as safety and 
the placing of fear in the hearts of your enemies, 
when they intended to stretch their hands towards 
you in order to attack you. Allah turned them away 
from you and protected you from them. Be mindful 
of Allah by fulfilling His instructions and avoiding 
His prohibitions. Let the believers place their reli¬ 
ance in Allah alone, in order to achieve their reli¬ 
gious and worldly interests. 

@ Allah had taken a firm promise from the Chil¬ 
dren of Israel, when He appointed over them twelve 
chiefs who were placed in authority over them. Al¬ 
lah said to the Israelites: I am with you- with my 
help and support if you establish the prayer in the 
complete manner, give Zakat from your wealth, 
accept all of my messengers without distinction, 
honour them, assist them and spend in good causes. 
If you do all of this, I will wipe out the sins you 
commit and I will enter you, on the Day of Judge¬ 
ment, into gardens with palaces overlooking flow¬ 
ing streams. Whoever disbelieves after making this 
promise has knowingly and deliberately deviated 
from the path of truth. 

@ Because of their breaking the promise that was 
taken from them, I distanced them from My mercy 
and I made their hearts so hard that no good could enter them and no advice could be of any benefit to them. They distort 
the placing of words by replacing them with other words, and by interpreting them according to their desires. They also 
left out practicing some of what they were advised to do. You will continuously discover, O Messenger, their betrayal of 
Allah and His believing servants, with the exception of a few of them, who fulfil the promise taken from them. So pardon 
them and do not take them to task. Overlook what they do, because that is being good and Allah loves those who do good. 
® Beneficial Points: 

1. The verses indicate the great favour of Allah on the Prophet (peace be upon him) and his Companions when He pro¬ 
tected them from the attack and the harm of the disbelievers. 

2. Having faith in and supporting the messengers, establishing the prayer and giving Zakat in the required manner are 
effective means of achieving closeness to Allah and gaining victory, strength, forgiveness and entry into Paradise. 

3. Breaking the promises that require following the messengers is a means for the hearts becoming hard. 

4. The verses condemn the practice of the Jews in distorting the divine scriptures that Allah revealed to them. 























@ Just as I took a firm promise from the Jews, I 
also took a promise from those who declare them¬ 
selves to be pure followers of Jesus (peace be upon 
him). They also left out practicing some of what 
they were advised to do, just as their predecessors 
from among the jews did. I then placed enmity and 
hatred between them and they began fighting and 
killing one another, each one declaring the other to 
be a disbeliever. Allah will inform them about what 
they used to do and will repay them for the same. 

After Allah mentioned the People of the Scripture 
and the promises that they broke, He instructs them 
to have faith in Muhammad (peace be upon him) in 
the following verse: 

@ O People of the Scripture - referring to the Jews 
who had the Torah and the Christians who had the 
Gospel - My messenger Muhammad (peace be 
upon him) has come to you to explain much of what 
you hide from the scripture revealed to you, and to 
overlook much of that in which there is no benefit 
besides disgracing you. The Qur’an has come to 
you as a Book from Allah, which is a light to guide 
you and a Book that makes clear all of what people 
require for their worldly and religious affairs. 

By this Book, Allah guides the person who 
follows faith and does good actions, which please 
Him, to the paths of safety from Allah’s punish¬ 
ment. These are the paths that lead to Paradise. He 
removes them from the darkness of disbelief and 
disobedience to the light of faith and obedience, 
and He guides them to the straight path: the path 
of Islam. 

@ Those Christians who say that ‘Allah is the 
Messiah, Jesus, son of Mary’ have committed disbelief. Say to them, O Messenger: Who is able to prevent Allah from 
destroying the Messiah, Jesus, son of Mary, as well as his mother and all of those on earth if He wishes to do so? 
If no one is able to stop Allah from this, it is a clear indication that there is no Allah but Allah and that all of those people 
- Jesus, son of Mary, his mother and all of creation - are all Allah’s creation. The dominion of the heavens and the earth, 
and whatever is between them, is Allah’s. He creates whatever He wishes and one such creation of His was Jesus (peace 
be upon him), who was His servant and messenger. Allah is able to do all things, nothing is outside His ability. He created 
Adam without a father or mother. He created Eve without a mother and He created Jesus without a father. 

<!♦} Beneficial Points: 

1. Not acting on Allah’s pledges can lead to enmity, the spread of hatred for another and infighting amongst those who 
go against Allah’s instruction. 

2. The noble Qur’an guides to the paths that lead to safety from the fire of Hell and entry into Paradise. 

3. The verses refute the Christians who say that Allah became incarnate in the Messiah (peace be upon him) and it makes 
their disbelief and misguidance clear. 

4. One of the proofs for the falseness of the claim of divinity for the Messiah is that if Allah wished to destroy the Mes¬ 
siah, his mother and all of those on earth, then no one would be able to prevent Him. This proves that they are human. 

5. One of the proofs for the falseness of the claim of divinity for the Messiah is that Allah indicates in the verses to ‘His 
creating whatever He wishes’. This shows us that the creation of Jesus (peace be upon him) without a father is by no 
means a proof for his divinity, as this form of creation was not something unique. In fact, there was a more astonishing 
form of creation when Adam (peace be upon him) was created without a father or a mother. 
























\ \ \ 


&\3\’oL\ 


I o4L)^\j' "^< 3 £\wi»i jjO_J «L 
|| ^iV^- jS \ 

I \j iU-ii ^\ ^ <3^ ^ 3X3XX3 

As»- (j-5. 

3 1 \ AjJgJj ^AAaX (_\\j ( " ) V^jS 


« 1 ^jo\ ^Jb Jj«^- dji\ % 

3c 


4 JL -50 


’ 4-2 


h&-s\ 


us 




s\; 


@ Both the Jews and the Christians claimed: ‘We 
are Allah’s children and loved ones’. Say, O Mes- 
„ senger, in refutation of their claim: Why does Allah 
punish you for the sins you commit? If you were 
eL His loved ones, as you claim, He would not have 
punished you, by your being killed or disfigured 
in the world, and by means of the fire of Hell in 
the Afterlife, because He does not punish those He 
loves. Instead, you are just like all other human 
beings. If any of them do good, Allah will reward 
them with Paradise. If any of them do evil, He 
will punish them in the fire of Hell. Allah forgives 
whomever He wishes through His grace; and He 
punishes whomever He wishes through His justice. 
The dominion of the heavens and the earth, and 
whatever is in between them, is Allah’s alone. To 
Him alone is the return. 

(jj) O People of the Scripture, Jews and Christians, 
My messenger Muhammad (peace be upon him) 
has come to you after a period when there were no 
messengers and when there was a real need for his 
mission, so that you do not say as an excuse, ‘No 
messenger came to us bringing good news of Al¬ 
lah’s reward nor any warning of His punishment’. 
Muhammad (peace be upon him) has come to you 
to give you good news of My reward and warn you 
of My punishment. I am able to do all things. Noth¬ 
ing is outside My ability. It is through My power 
that I sent the messengers and I sent Muhammad 
(peace be upon him) as the final messenger. 

(0) Remember, O Messenger, when Moses said to 
his people, the Israelites, ‘O People, remember, 
with your hearts and tongues, Allah’s favour to you 
when He made prophets amongst you calling you to guidance, made you kings in control of your affairs after you were 
subjugated slaves, and gave you such favours that He had not given to any other people in your time’. 

@ Moses said, ‘O People, enter the land that has been purified - Jerusalem and the surrounding area - which Allah has 
promised that you will enter, and fight the disbelievers in it. Do not become weak before the tyrants, because you will 
then end up as losers in the world and the Afterlife’. 

@ His people said to him, ‘O Moses, in the Holy Land there is a powerful and mighty people and this is preventing us 
from entering it. We will not enter it as long as these people are there, because we do not have the ability to fight them. 
If they leave, we will go in’. 

{§§) Two men from the companions of Moses who feared Allah and were afraid of His punishment, whom Allah had bless¬ 
ed by enabling them to obey Him, urged their people to fulfil the instruction of Moses and said, ‘Enter the gate of the city 
against the tyrants. Once you go through the gate you will - by Allah’s permission - defeat them, as Allah’s custom is to 
give victory after the means of having faith and making preparation are adopted. Place your reliance and trust in Allah 
alone, if you truly have faith. Faith in Allah requires you to rely on Him’. 

Beneficial Points: 

1. The fact that Allah punished some of the disbelievers of the Israelites by disfiguring them and by other means proves 
the falseness of their claim that they were Allah’s children and loved ones. 

2. Placing reliance on Allah is a means of gaining Allah’s assistance. 


1 


Al-Ma’idah 






















@ The Children of Israel insisted on going against 
the instruction of their prophet, Moses, and said, 
‘We will never enter the city as long as the tyrants 
are there. So you, O Moses, and your Lord go and 
fight the tyrants. We will remain sitting here and 
will not join you in the fight’. 

$ Moses said to his Lord, ‘O Lord, I have no au¬ 
thority over anyone besides myself and my brother, 
Aaron. So separate us from those who do not obey 
You and Your messenger’. 

@ Allah said to His Prophet Moses (peace be upon 
him), ‘Allah has forbidden entry into the Holy 
Land for the Israelites for a period of forty years, in 
which they will wander on earth aimlessly without 
direction. Do not grieve, O Moses, over those who 
do not follow Allah, because the punishment they 
receive is because of their sins’. 

@ Relate with the truth O Messenger, to these Jews 
who are jealous and who do wrong, the incident of 
the two sons of Adam, Cain and Abel, When they 
both offered a sacrifice to gain closeness to Allah, 
Allah accepted the sacrifice offered by Abel be¬ 
cause he was mindful of Him and did not accept 
the offering of Cain because he was not mindful of 
Allah. Cain was unhappy about the fact that Abel’s 




OJyM 


\ \ Y 


&\3 \igj 












at Ad JcB 

^ ^ c i "■» 


cup 


4 0 9 


sacrifice was accepted and jealously said, ‘I will ^ ^ 4 ^ 

kill vou. O Abel!’Abel renlied.‘Allah onlv accents 



Al-Ma’idah 


112 


TP 


kill you, O Abel!’Abel replied, ‘Allah only accepts 
the offering of the one who is mindful of Him by 
fulfilling His instructions and avoiding His prohi¬ 
bitions’. 

@ If you lift your hand intending to kill me, I will 
not do the same as you. It is not because I am a 
coward, but because I fear Allah the Lord of all cre¬ 
ated things. 

{§} I want you to return with the sin of wrongly killing me, together with your previous sins, and become one of those who 
will enter the fire of Hell on the Day of Judgement and remain there. That is the reward of those who overstep the limits 
of Allah. I do not want to take on your crime and become one of the sinners. 

The evil prompting soul of Cain persuaded him to wrongly kill his brother, Abel. So he killed him and because of that 
he became one of those who are losers in this world and the Afterlife. He set a bad example and will therefore bear that 
burden, as well as the burden of any person who does the same until the Day of Judgement, without any reduction in the 
burden of those who imitate him. 

@ Allah sent a crow to dig the earth in front of him to bury another dead crow and teach him how to cover his brother’s 
body. He then became regretful. Regret is the end result of those who commit sins. 

4*} Beneficial Points: 

1. Going against the messengers results in punishment, as occurred to the Israelites when Allah punished them by their 
wandering aimlessly. 

2. The story of the two sons of Adam apparently indicates that the first sin to occur on earth was envy and oppression. 

3. The caution displayed by the son of Adam who was killed indicates the duty of leaving oppression and retaliation lest 
one meets his Lord having shed blood. 

4. Shedding blood without a valid reason results in loss and regret. 

5. Any person who sets a bad example or publicises and encourages an evil action will receive the equivalent sin of those 
who follow him. 



















eJol^lU 


OJy* 




\ v 


0 ‘s 





crt 

J^l^li====l3 

lli \ l_^4 tli 1 ^=l3 \^\^J>-\ li^Sr (j^ Ui \ 

^ * Z—r=> j\\ 1 * V.>r^; ^ ^3^\^1 aJt^J^.^-- ||t cred, and regards it to be forbidden to kill such a 

' 9 ^ 9 * |1C person, it is as if he has given life to aii people, be¬ 

ll 


@ Due to Cain’s murder of his brother, I informed 
the Israelites that any person who kills another per¬ 
son for no valid reason - such as legal retribution or 
as punishment for causing corruption in the land by 
treason or waging war - it is as if he has killed all 
people, since he did not make a distinction between 
an innocent and a guilty person. Whoever refrains 
from killing a person whose soul I have made sa- 


| ^ssji\ 





\y£\ )£a\ 1 Cfl^\ \2 4j^V 

_ %y a ^ 4^_^ii\ \ 

| Jj ^====^ 

]j x12sl^j 



cause in such an action lies the safety of all people. 
My messengers brought to the Israelites clear signs 
and evidences. Despite this many of them over¬ 
stepped My limits by committing sins and going 
against the messengers. 

Jl) The punishment of those who wage war against 
Allah and His Messenger, and who challenge them 
p \. ^ p,<^ ^ -T- . • »? . , A& by s P readin g corruption on earth though killing, 

i looting and creating fear on the roads, is that they 
o s' ^yz- sso j < / o $ ^ ^ ^ be killed, or crucified, or that they have their al- 

jP€^\%jXjSu l )\ temate hands and feet cut off, and if the offence is 

repeated the left hands and right feet are to be cut 
off, or they are to be exiled. Such punishment is a 
disgrace for them in the world; and in the Afterlife, 
they will receive a great punishment — 

@ Except for those warmongers who repent before 
you, people of authority, get hold of them. Know, 
then, that Allah is Forgiving and Merciful towards 
them after they repent. Due to His mercy, He over¬ 
looks the punishment that is due to them. 

O you who believe in Allah and follow His 
Messenger, be mindful of Allah by fulfilling His in¬ 
structions and avoiding His prohibitions, search for 
a means of closeness to Him by doing what He instructs you to do and staying away from what He prohibits you from, 
and strive against the disbelievers for His pleasure so that you get what you desire and you are saved from what you fear. 
@) Had those who disbelieve in Allah and His messengers owned everything in the earth and the likeness of it and gave 
all of that to ransom themselves from Allah’s punishment on the Day of Judgement, such ransom will not be accepted 
from them. And they will receive a painful punishment. 

Beneficial Points: 

1. The sacred law requires that a dead person be buried and covered with soil, which is a practice that Allah has taught 
human beings. 

2. The verses show the sanctity of the human soul, and that protecting it and giving life to it is like having done so for all 
of mankind. On the other hand, destroying or harming one human soul is like doing it to all of mankind. 

3. The punishment for those who wage war against Allah and His Messenger by spreading corruption on earth by killing, 
looting and cutting off roads is that they be killed without being crucified, or killed by crucifixation, or that their limbs on 
opposite sides be cut off, or by exiling them from the land in accordance with the offence they committed. 

4. The repentance of those who spread corruption by waging war and cutting off roads before the ruler gets hold of them 
necessitates pardon. 

5. The verses stress that ransom will not be accepted on the Day of Judgement - even if it be all that is on earth - from 
those for whom the punishment of Hell is obligatory. 


















sitili 




> > t 




4^; 




Up They will want to leave the fire of Hell after they 
enter it. But how can that happen? They will never 
come out of it. Instead, they will always remain in 
it and they will receive a continuous punishment. 

After Allah mentioned the rule regarding a person 
who openly takes the wealth of people, in the fol¬ 
lowing verse He explains the rule with respect to 
the person who does so secretly i.e. the thief. 

@ As for those who are caught stealing, those in 
authority are to cut off the right hand of the male 
and female thief as a punishment from Allah for the 
crime of wrongfully taking people’s wealth, and to 
serve as a lesson and deterrent for them, as well as 
others. Allah is Mighty and nothing can overpower 
His decree. He is Wise in His decree and legisla¬ 
tion. 

@ Whoever repents to Allah from the crime of 
theft and sets right his action, then Allah, out of His 
grace, will accept His repentance. That is because 
Allah forgives the sins of those who repent to Him 
and is Merciful towards them. 

However if such a matter were to reach the court 
of law the legal punishment cannot be dismissed 
by repentance. 

@ You, O Messenger, certainly know that the do¬ 
minion of the heavens and the earth is Allah’s. He 
acts in them as He wishes. He punishes whomever 
He wishes through His justice; and forgives whom¬ 
ever He wishes through His grace. Allah is able to 
do all things and nothing is outside His ability. 

@ O Messenger, do not be made sad by those who 
rush to announce their disbelief of you and the rev¬ 
elation that you brought. These were the hypocrites 
who professed faith on the outside, but hid disbelief on the inside. They were also some Jews who eagerly listened to 
the lies of their leaders, who distort the truth having ignored you and have not come to you out of pride. They distort 
the words of Allah in the Torah and change it to suit their desires. They say to their followers, ‘If the law of Muhammad 
conforms to your desires, follow it; and if it does not conform, then be careful of it’. If Allah wills to misguide any per¬ 
son, you, O Messenger, will never find anyone who will be able to save them from misguidance and guide them to the 
path of truth. Such hypocrites and Jews, who have these qualities, are the ones whose hearts Allah has not intended to 
purify from disbelief. In the world, they will receive humiliation and shame; and in the Afterlife, they will receive a great 
punishment: the fire of Hell. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The wisdom behind the legal punishment for theft is to prevent the thief from wrongfully taking people’s wealth and 
to make others afraid of doing the same. 

2. The legal punishment for theft is to cut-off the right hand. 

3. The repentance of a thief is accepted as long as the matter does not reach the ruler. Once it reaches the ruler, the law is 
binding and will not be cancelled by repentance. 

4. A caller to Allah should not become sad and distressed because of the disbelief, plotting and conspiracy of others, 
because Allah will foil the plots of such people. 


o'* ^3 -LA 

£^443^^ & 

1^3 pit 

A . . « - c ) . -s . 

* v j^=4i 5 

j\ c>l<dte 























jjfX\ ju*J^3 

lyp uj iAi:S 

^ j'Js \ \ l£ -xjb 

05^1fl3^cL^\ \^j \j ^J^i)]j °\j^\j* Zfj&i 

-X-£-^> 4^\ c_^lX^===» 

Crt? 




£ 


=?i($) ^==^ J~& ciijlijlS 4^\ Sy^\ li-j p|* 


These Jews frequently listen to lies and con¬ 
sume unlawful wealth, such as usury. If they bring 
a case before you for judgement, O Messenger, then 
pass judgement between them if you wish, or leave 
off passing judgement if you so wish - you have the 
|i» option of doing either of these. If you choose not to 
^ pass judgement, they will not be able to harm you 
^ in any way. If you do pass judgement, then do so 
H with justice, even though they themselves are un¬ 
fair and are your enemies. Allah loves those who 
are just in their judgements, even though the case is 
between those who are the judge’s enemies. 

@ These people are strange. They disbelieve you, 
but come to you for judgement hoping that you will 
pass judgement in accordance with their desires, 
whereas they have the Torah with them, which 
they claim to have faith in and which contains Al¬ 
lah’s law. They, then, ignore your judgement when 
it does not suit their desires. So they have denied 
what is in their scripture as well as ignored your 
judgement. The action of such people is not that of 
people of faith and they therefore do not have faith 
in you and what you brought. 

@ I sent down the Torah to Moses (peace be upon 
him) containing guidance towards good and a light 
to make things clear. Judgement was given in ac¬ 
cordance with it by the prophets of the Israelites, 
who had devoted themselves to following Me, as 
well as by the scholars who used to teach people be¬ 
cause I had entrusted them with My book and made 
them guardians to preserve and protect it from dis¬ 
tortion or change. They are witnesses that it is the 
truth and people refer to them with respect to it. So, 
Jews, do not fear people, but fear Me alone; and do not take in exchange for judgement in accordance with what I have 
revealed a small price of leadership, fame or wealth. Whoever does not pass judgement in accordance with what I have 
revealed and considers this to be lawful, better or equal to My judgement, then such people are truly disbelievers. 

I ordered the Jews in the Torah that if any person deliberately and wrongfully kills another he will be killed in retribu¬ 
tion. If any person deliberately removes the eye of another person, his eye will be removed. If any person cuts the nose of 
another person, his nose will be cut. If any person cuts the ear of another person, his ear will be cut. If any person removes 
the tooth of another person, his tooth will be removed. I also ordered them with respect to wounds that the offender will 
be penalised with retribution for his offence. 

Whoever voluntarily pardons the offender, then such pardon shall be a compensation for their sins, as they have pardoned 
one who has wronged them. Whoever does not judge according to what Allah has revealed with respect to the law of 
retribution and other laws, then such person has overstepped Allah’s limits. 

<*!> Beneficial Points: 

1. The verses explain some of the attributes of the Jews, such as lying, consuming of usury and the desire to have their 
matters decided by other than the sacred law, in order to show their misguidance and warn against it. 

2. The verses explain the legitimacy of just retribution with respect to life and injury, which was something that Allah 
had ordered for those before us. 

3. The virtue of pardon from retribution is encouraged and the great reward for the same, represented by the compensation 
of sins, is explained. 

4. The verses warn against passing judgement with respect to retribution and other matters in accordance with something 
other than what Allah has revealed. 








Al-Ma’idah 


115 
























o | 





AOof 


1 (S aJ&j ibj^\^5 
>^==^3 cl / L ? A -£ 4 ^\ ^ 

”** ^ ^g . ^ ^ ^ 

^5yC\ <^\ ^ 


WW^y 




LJ^-L$ & Aj>-^ Sja\4j^\ ^L2 j_3^J 



@) After the prophets of the Israelites, I sent Je¬ 
sus, son of Mary, as a believer in the Torah, giving 
judgement in accordance with it. I also gave him 
the Gospel that contained guidance to the truth and 
evidences to remove doubts and solve difficult cas¬ 
es of rulings: it corresponded to the Torah that came 
before it, except in a few rulings that it replaced. I 
made the Gospel a guide and a means to restrain 
people from doing that which was prohibited. 

@ The Christians should believe in what Allah 
has revealed in the Gospel and they should judge 
in accordance with the truth it contains prior to the 
coming of Muhammad (peace be upon him). Who¬ 
ever does not judge according to what Allah has 
sent down, then such people are the ones who do 
not follow Allah and leave the truth for falsehood. 

After Allah praised the Torah and the Gospel, He 
praises the Qur’an in the following verse: 

(J§p I sent down to you, O Messenger, the Qur’an 
with the truth about which there is no doubt that it 
is from Allah. It is a confirmation and guardian for 
the revealed books that came before it. Whatever in 
those books conforms to it is the truth, and what¬ 
ever does not is false. So judge between people ac¬ 
cording to what I have revealed to you in it and do 
not follow their desires which they have adopted 
in leaving the truth that has been revealed to you 
about which there is no doubt. 

I have made a sacred law and clear path for every 
nation. If I willed to make all the laws one, I would 
have done so. But I made a separate law for every 
nation in order to test them all and to see who fol¬ 
lows and who does not. So rush towards doing good 
actions and leave evil ones. Your return on the Day of Judgement is to Me alone. I will inform you about that which you 
used to differ in and will repay you for the actions you did. 

^ Judge between them, O Messenger, in accordance with what Allah has revealed to you! Do not follow their opinions 
that arise from following their desires. Be careful that they do not mislead you from some of what Allah has revealed 
to you. They will leave no stone unturned in an attempt to do just that. If they turn away from accepting judgement in 
accordance with what Allah has sent down to you, then know that Allah only intends to punish them for some of their 
sins in this world. In the Afterlife, He will punish them for all of their sins. There are many people who do not follow 
Allah’s laws. 

(jj) Do they ignore your judgement seeking the judgement of the idolaters from the period of ignorance who pass judge¬ 
ment according to their desires? In the sight of those who have conviction and who understand that which Allah has sent 
to His prophet, there can be no one better in judgement than Allah; but not in the sight of those who are ignorant and who 
only follow their desires, even though they may be false. 

Beneficial Points: 

1. All prophets are in complete agreement with respect to the fundamentals of religion, despite there being a few differ¬ 
ences between them with regards to secondary matters of the sacred law. 

2. It is necessary to pass judgement in accordance with Allah’s sacred law and to ignore all false beliefs besides it. 

3. The verses condemn the passing of judgement in accordance with the customs and laws of the people of the period of 
ignorance. 


0 ' > * » 


Al-Ma’idah 


116 






















@ O you who believe in Allah and follow His Mes¬ 
senger, do not take the Jews and Christians as your 
allies and close friends whom you support. The 
Jews will only support those of their religion, and 
the Christians will do the same. Both groups will 
unite against you. Whoever from you takes them as 
friends is one of them. Allah does not guide those 
who do wrong by supporting the disbelievers. 

@ You will see, O Messenger, those weak in faith 
rushing to become friends with the Jews and the 
Christians, saying, ‘We fear that these people will 
gain victory and when they come into power we 
will be harmed’. Perhaps Allah will give victory to 
the Messenger and the believers or bring something 
from Him that will crush the force of the Jews and 
their allies. Those who rush to befriend them will 
then regret the hypocrisy they kept hidden within 
their hearts, because the weak links they held on to 
will be for nothing. 

@ The believers will say in surprise at the condi¬ 
tion of these hypocrites, ‘Are these the people who 
swore serious oaths that they were with you - O 
you who have faith - in faith, support and alliance?’ 
Their actions have gone to waste and they have be¬ 
come losers because they lost their true goal and 
because of the punishment prepared for them. 

(j»S) O you who believe in Allah and follow His Mes¬ 
senger, if anyone of you turns back from their reli¬ 
gion to disbelief, then Allah will soon replace them 
with a people whom He will love and who will love 
Him due to their steadfastness. They will be com¬ 
passionate towards the believers and harsh towards 
the disbelievers. They will strive with their wealth 
and their lives so that Allah’s word is victorious. They will not fear the one who blames them, because their concern will 
be Allah’s pleasure and blame rather than that of created things. That is Allah’s grace which He gives to whomever of 
His servants He wishes. Allah’s grace and kindness is wide and He knows who is deserving of the same and who is not. 
After Allah prohibited taking the Jews, Christians and other disbelievers as friends, He sets out who the believers should 
take as friends in the following verse: 

@ The Jews, Christians and other disbelievers are not your friends. Your true friends and supporters are Allah, His Mes¬ 
senger and the believers who establish their prayers completely, give Zakat of their wealth and who are humble before 
Allah. 

@ Whoever becomes the friend of Allah, His Messenger and the believers by supporting them, then they will be from 
Allah’s party and Allah’s party will be victorious since Allah is their supporter. 

@ O you who believe in Allah and follow His Messenger, do not become friends with those Jews and Christians who 
have received scripture, and those idolaters, all of whom poke fun at and play with your religion. Be mindful of Allah by 
avoiding becoming friends with those whom He has prohibited you from so doing, if you truly have faith in Him and in 
His revelation. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The verses indicate the principle of Al-wala’ wa’l-bara’ (loyalty and disowning): which is, essentially, to be loyal to and 
love Allah, His Messenger and the believers, and to hate the people of disbelief and avoid loving them. 

2. One of the attributes of the hypocrites is that they take Allah’s enemies as friends. 

3. Carelessness and negligence in supporting the religion may result in the person who is negligent being replaced with 
someone else, and the honour of supporting the religion being taken away from him. 

4. It is necessary to befriend Allah, His Messenger and the people of faith and to support Allah’s religion. 

5. The verses warn against coming close to, loving and befriending those disbelievers and hypocrites who poke fun at 
and mock Allah’s religion. 




Xp 


^ ^ ii)\ 

* ijXh\ (^) jp XjXsp X* 



Al-Ma’idah 


117 




















o Jo 1^3 OJ 


\ \ A 








*» 


cA«-tl3 S I^IjO^IaJ,^-® 1 (_.■<^>3\J-AS JS 0 


a5_^V^\ » w \sv 9 »\g-\ ^Vq ^Vw> 


\&\jX\* 


*' * 


Wj ^Aj )jprp~J&yt3 

.'>*** *\f < 
* aX^i AS 




So- 


(jp They also poke fun and play when you call to¬ 
wards prayer, which is the greatest act of worship. 

That is because they are a nation who do not under¬ 
stand the meaning of worship of Allah and they do 
not understand the sacred laws that Allah has made. 

(jp Say, O Messenger, to those of the People of the 
Scripture who mock at you: ‘Do you find any fault 
with us besides our faith in Allah and in what He 
revealed to us and what He revealed before us? And 
our belief that most of you do not follow Allah due 
to not having faith and not obeying His sacred law? 

What you consider a fault is actually a virtue’. 

(jp Say, O Messenger: Shall I tell you about those 
who are more at fault and whose punishment is 
worse than these people? They are their predeces¬ 
sors whom Allah has removed from His mercy, 
transformed into monkeys and pigs and made some 
of them worshippers of false Allahs. The Arabic 
word taghut refers to any being that is worshipped 
besides Allah with its consent. Those mentioned 
will be in a worse position on the Day of Judgement 
and their efforts are further away from the straight 
path. 

@ When the hypocrites from amongst them come 
to you, O believers, on the outside they show that 
they have faith. The fact is that they were soaked 
in disbelief when they entered and when they left. 

Allah knows best about the disbelief they kept hid¬ 
den, even though they gave the outer appearance of 
having faith. Allah will repay them for that. 

(jp You, O Messenger, see many of the Jews and 
hypocrites rushing towards committing sins, such 
as lying, oppression and consuming that which is 
unlawful. How evil is their behaviour! 

{§} Why do their leaders and scholars not prohibit them from the lying, false testimony and wrongful consumption of the 
wealth of people that they rush towards? This action of their leaders and scholars, who do not prohibit them from evil, 
is wrong. 

(jp When the Jews were faced with difficulty and drought, they said, ‘Allah’s Hand is restrained from giving goodness 
and gifts. He is holding back from us what He has’. Their hands were restrained from doing goodness and they were 
removed from Allah’s mercy because of this statement of theirs. But in fact Allah’s Hands are wide open in goodness and 
generosity. He spends as He wills. He gives and He withholds. No one can stop Him or force Him. That which has been 
revealed to you, O Messenger, only increases the Jews in disobedience and disbelief because of their envy. He placed en¬ 
mity and hatred between the various groups of the Jews. Whenever they gather to conspire for war and made preparation 
for it, Allah broke their unity and took away their strength. They continuously strive to do that which causes corruption 
in the earth by their attempts to wipe out Islam and by their plots against it. 

<!*} Beneficial Points: 

1. The verses condemn the practice of the hypocrites who profess outside that they have faith while keeping disbelief and 
hatred for Islam and the Muslims hidden within themselves. 

2. The verses condemn the scholar who remains silent in the face of the sins of his people and who does not denounce 
their evil actions and warn them against such behaviour. 

3. The Jews were ill-mannered with Allah when they described His Hands as being ‘tied’ and withholding good. 

4. In Allah’s hands lie all things and He is the most generous and most giving, may He be glorified. 

5. The verses make reference to the differences and hatred between the various Jewish sects as a result of their disbelief 
and leaving the truth. 


\js\jX\ <—\j\Sl? j5j\ 

XM 4 A 9 \o\_3 \ £33 

Al-Ma'idah 118 Part 6 

























^ "'** ^ ^ 
cJtj^c^ \}]y^ S^ri. ^ 

f^P W-* ^ jjAjI^ol^ c-L^j^ 




j*j^ \ L$4J^\ O£<$ \ 4J^\5 J A^i 

^J$j\y~*\* Cf^\ J*y& \ Jp^piSS^ 

^>>rf W^) \j aj^ S*^<y* ]/^(k 

^X^\ 35& 0 hjfjQjJ^J 

3^5 [\±^jSi^W-Sk 
05 lx. 


If the Jews and the Christians accepted what 
was brought by Muhammad (peace be upon him) 
and were mindful of Allah by leaving sins, I would 
have forgiven the sins they committed, even if they 
were many, and I would have entered them on the 
Day of Judgement into gardens of delight, in which 
they would enjoy delights that will never end. 

@ If the Jews had practiced what was in the To¬ 
rah, and the Christians practiced what was in the 
Gospel, and if all of them had practiced what was 
revealed to them in the Qur’an, then I would have 
made the means of provision easy for them by 
sending down rain and growing vegetation. From 
amongst the People of the Scripture are those who 
jj ^ are moderate and firm on the truth; but the actions 
^ of many of them are evil, because they do not have 
faith in what was brought by Muhammad (peace be 
upon him). 

@ O Messenger, communicate what has been re¬ 
vealed to you from your Lord completely and do 
not hide anything of it. If you do hide anything, 
then you are not one who conveys the message of 
His Lord. 

The Prophet (peace be upon him) communicat¬ 
ed everything he was instructed to. Anyone who 
claims anything to the contrary has spoken a great 
lie about Allah. 

Allah will protect you from people and they will 
not be able to harm you. Your duty is only to com¬ 
municate the divine message. Allah will not bless 
with guidance those who disbelieve and who have 
no desire to be guided. 

Sj} Say, O Messenger: You - Jews and Christians 
- have no religious basis, unless you practice what is in the Torah and the Gospel and practice the Qur’an that has been 
revealed to you. Your faith is not valid until you have faith in it and practice it. 

That which has been revealed to you from your Lord will increase the disobedience and disbelief of many of the People 
of the Scripture because of their envy. So do not be sad over these disbelievers: In the believers who follow you there is 
sufficient goodness. 

@ The believers in Muhammad, and the Jews, Sabians and Christians before Muhammad - whichever of them believes 
Allah and the Last Day and does good actions - they will have no fear for the future and will not be sad over that which 
they missed in the worldly life. 

@ I took firm promises from the Israelites that they will listen and follow. But they broke their promises and followed 
their desires by ignoring what their messengers brought and by disbelieving some and murdering others. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Following what Allah revealed is a means of expiating evil actions and gaining entry into Paradise as well as securing 
vast provision in the worldly life. 

2. Those who call to Allah are reminded that the propagation that is correct and worthy of consideration is the one that is 
complete without deletion or alteration and that which is done according to revelation. 

3. No belief is worthy of consideration, unless the person who holds such a belief can prove that it is from Allah. 


Al-Ma’idah 






















l)) ^ o$ ^ s^iv^uS 

•4^/^ e>^j^ pl^ == ^ J l|j i? jS^\ | 

\u*J J>\^i\ <^j\Jj aLJ^ A^llu> 4J^\ < ^ K -i 

a^\ XlXX^ ^ 6i^\y^==^^ 5^ O^r^ 2 ^ 

\^cX^ ^ oij -Xj>t^ 2ci\S! aSAj ctil3 


<$A8W 

->^j> jy^c^^j 4 $ ^\pyj^^s\ 

A^3 Xf& 

oi/§ \>4^ i£^k=XkX& 'kih^x^ 

^U^i\ 0^0L 3Xl0\ J)0b^MJX\ p 


* ,A >t* 3 ai Y ^ 


sjV 


L>Lr* 


(Sjp They thought that no harm would come to them 
for their breaking promises and covenants and for 
disbelieving and killing their prophets. But the re¬ 
sult of their actions was that they became blind and 
deaf to the truth and misled from guidance. Then 
Allah turned towards them out of His grace. They 
again then became blind and deaf to the truth. This 
happened to many of them. Allah sees what they 
do. Nothing is hidden from Him and He will repay 
them for their actions. 

@ The Christians who say that ‘Allah is the Mes¬ 
siah, Jesus, son of Mary’ have committed disbe¬ 
lief, as they have attributed Lordship to someone 
other than Allah. The Messiah, Jesus, son of Mary, 
himself said to them, ‘O Israelites, worship Allah 
alone. He is my Lord and your Lord. We are all His 
servants’. Whoever ascribes anything as a partner 
to Allah, then Allah will not allow them to ever en¬ 
ter Paradise and their place will be the fire of Hell. 

They will have no one to help or assist them before 
Allah and no one to save them from the punishment 
that awaits them. 

@ The Christians who say that ‘Allah is part of the 
Trinity: Father, Son and Holy Spirit’ have commit¬ 
ted disbelief. Allah is far above such a statement. 

Allah is not many, but He is only One Allah Who 
has no partner. If they do not stop saying such 
things, a painful punishment will afflict them. 

|jS) Will these people not retract this statement, re¬ 
pent to Allah and ask His forgiveness for the idola¬ 
try they committed? Allah is Forgiving towards the 
one who repents, whatever may have been the sin, 
even if it was disbelief. Allah is Compassionate to 
the believers. 

<Sj) The Messiah, Jesus, son of Mary, was only a messenger like other messengers. Just as death occurs to other messen¬ 
gers, it will occur to him as well. His mother, Mary, was a truthful and sincere woman. Both of them were in need of and 
used to consume food. How can they be Allahs when they were in need of food? Look, O Messenger, and think about 
how I make clear to them the signs indicating My Oneness and the falsehood of their extremism in attributing Lordship 
to others besides Me. Despite this, they do not recognise these signs. Then look and think about how they are misled from 
the truth, despite these clear signs indicating My Oneness. 

@ Say, O Messenger, as an argument against their worship of others besides Allah: Do you worship that which can bring 
you no benefit and which cannot protect you from any harm? Such a Allah is in reality very weak! Whilst Allah is High 
above any state of weakness. Allah alone is the One Who hears your statements and knows your actions. Nothing remains 
hidden from Him and He will repay you accordingly. 

(jp Say, O Messenger, to the Christians: Do not overstep the boundaries of the instruction you were given to follow the 
truth. Do not be excessive in reverence of those whom you were instructed to revere, such as prophets, regarding them to 
be divine as you have done with respect to Jesus, son of Mary. You did this because of following your predecessors who 
were astray, who led many other people astray and who were far from the path of truth. 

Beneficial Points: 

1. Some Jewish sects used to murder prophets and break their covenants. 2. The disbelief of the Christians who claimed 
Lordship for the Messiah (peace be upon him) is explained. 3. Belief in the Trinity is refuted by explaining its falseness 
and warning against embracing such a belief. The verses also call for repentance from such a belief. 4. One of the proofs 
that the Messiah and his mother were human is that they used to eat food and do the actions that arise from that. 5. The 
inability to protect from harm and to bring benefit is one of the clearest proofs that those being worshipped besides Allah 
were not entitled to Lordship, as they are helpless. 6. Extremism and overstepping the limits of the sacred law when 
dealing with the righteous servants of Allah is prohibited. 




,\v 






Al-Ma’idah 















o JoLU \)y^ 


\ y\ 




ly ^ = t$ \y^2s\^>^£y\ ( 3 ^ 6 -%? 2 

£ ^ ^ ^ '-' 

^C^J===cj* (j p^^^LuLjS! > 



® •’-’ * y* i 

»-> \ *-■ < < \ - "t r j < 

•X-S La 


*- 


I i> 4 j\c- 4$ p\jL^-Lfl^ 

A^^ijjr^\y\^===^ j^^L>jjS~^~ j 
^-= {j ^- ==i 3 j *L&\ 

: ijj Sj 'Le-oA^ xj^\ o j^>3 *Q 

\$4r^\JS\%.^< JJ& 

l !$>&> \S #■ ^jj^J> zy* _>_4rL>3' ’ ^ 

\^Cp\I_a ^jAV < ' 



Al-Ma’idah 


»\s uC®\*C5j dj*y~z "ot ** 

Part 6 


121 


(j|) Allah, may He be glorified, tells us that He dis¬ 
tanced the disbelievers of the Israelites from His 
mercy in the scripture He revealed to David, name¬ 
ly the Psalms, and in the scripture He revealed to 
Jesus, son of Mary, namely the Gospel. He did this 
because of the sins they committed and due to their 
violation of the things Allah made sacred. 

(Sj) They did not forbid the sinner from amongst 
them from committing sin. Instead, the sinners 
used to commit sins and evil openly because no one 
would disapprove of it. How evil was the action of 
not forbidding the evil that they used to do! 
dj§S) You will see, O Messenger, many of the dis¬ 
believing Jews forming alliances with the idolators 
and opposing you and those who believe in Allah’s 
oneness. How evil is their action of taking disbe¬ 
lievers as allies! This will cause Allah’s anger and 
lead them into the Fire, where they will live eternal¬ 
ly, never to leave. 

@ If these Jews had true faith in Allah and His 
Prophet, they would not have taken the idolaters 
as their allies instead of the believers, because they 
were prohibited from taking disbelievers as friends. 
But most of these Jews do not obey Allah nor do 
they side with Him and the believers. 

© You will find, O Messenger, that the people with 
the most hostility towards those who have faith in 
you and that which you brought are the Jews, due 
to their malice, jealousy and pride, as well as the 
idol worshippers and others who associate partners 
with Allah. 

You will also find that the people who are closest 
in affection to those who have faith in you and that 


which you brought are those who call themselves Christians. 

The verse explains that the reason for these people being close to the believers is that there are scholars, ascetics and 
worshippers among them who are humble and not proud. Good does not enter the heart of a proud person. 

@ The hearts of these Christians are soft. When they listen to any part of the Qur’an that has been revealed, they cry 
in submission, because they recognise that it is the truth because of their knowing that which Jesus (peace be with him) 
brought. They say: Our Lord, we accept what You have revealed to Your Messenger, Muhammad (peace be upon him). 
So record us, Our Lord, among those of the nation who will be witnesses against people on the Day of Rising. 




















@ What prevents us from having faith in Allah and 
the truth that He has revealed to Muhammad (peace 
be upon him)? We hope that we will enter Paradise 
together with the prophets and their followers who 
obeyed Allah and feared His punishment. 

@ Allah rewarded them for their faith and their ac¬ 
ceptance of the truth with gardens that have palaces 
and trees overlooking flowing streams, where they 
will live eternally. That is the reward of those who 
do good by following the truth and submitting to it, 
without any restriction or condition. 

Those who disbelieve in Allah and His Mes- 






\ Y Y 


fe\3V£X.\ 


^^1 1 iiuov wiiu uiauvnwvw 111 ruian anva 111a ivi^a _ ^ ^ ^ ^ 0 JL ^ ^ ^ s f ^ 

senger, and reject the verses Allah revealed to His i cJ+b 

Messenger, they are the companions of the Fire, 


go n od Jj 

nvful *1 

^uyiaS> 

b^M id 

(ti) Aji e^li 4ji\ 



which they will enter and never leave. 

(jp) O you who have faith in Allah and follow His 
Messenger, do not regard as unlawful the 
food, drink and women that Allah has made lawful 
for you. Do not treat these things as unlawful in an 
attempt to practise asceticism and devotion. Do not 
overstep the limits of that which Allah has forbid¬ 
den to you, because Allah does not love those who 
overstep His limits; rather, He hates them. 

(j§j) Consume the lawful and pure things that Allah 
gives to you from His provision. But do not con¬ 
sume the unlawful, such as something that is taken 
wrongfully or is impure. Be mindful of Allah by 
obeying His instructions and avoiding His prohibi¬ 
tions, because He is the one you have faith in and it 
requires you to be mindful of Him. 

@ Allah will not take you to account, O believers, 
for the oaths that you speak unintentionally. He will 
take you to account for those oaths that you break 
after making them with a firm intention in your hearts. The atonement for such oaths is one of three options: feeding ten 
poor people with the average food of your city, by giving each poor person half a sa‘ of food; or clothing them with what 
society considers to be a suit of clothing; or freeing a believing slave. If the person required to make atonement does not 
find any of these three things, then the required atonement is fasting for three days. That is the atonement of your oaths, 
O believers, when you break them. Guard your oaths from being taken falsely in Allah’s name and from breaking them, 
unless it is better to do so. If it is better to break your oath, then do so and give the atonement. 

Just as Allah has explained to you the atonement for oaths, He also explains to you His laws, which make clear what is 
lawful and what is unlawful, so that you might thank Allah for having taught you what you did not know. 

Allah will not take you to account, O believers, for the oaths that you speak unintentionally. He will take you to account 
for those oaths that you break after making them with a firm intention in your hearts. The atonement for such oaths is one 
of three options: feeding ten poor people with the average food of your city, by giving each poor person half a sa‘ of food; 
or clothing them with what society considers to be a suit of clothing; or freeing a believing slave. If the person required to 
make atonement does not find any of these three things, then the required atonement is fasting for three days. That is the 
atonement of your oaths, O believers, when you break them. Guard your oaths from being taken falsely in Allah’s name 
and from breaking them, unless it is better to do so. If it is better to break your oath, then do so and give the atonement. 
Just as Allah has explained to you the atonement for oaths, He also explains to you His laws, which make clear what is 
lawful and what is unlawful, so that you might thank Allah for having taught you what you did not know. 

@ O you who have faith in Allah and follow His Messenger, intoxicants that affect the mind, gambling with a consid¬ 
eration from both sides, stone alters on which the idolaters offer sacrifices or which they erect for worship, and arrows 
by which they used to draw lots - these are all acts of sin that Satan has made attractive. Avoid such acts, so that you 
successfully achieve the Paradise that you desire and are saved from the Fire that you fear. 

® Beneficial Points 1. We are instructed to look for pure provisions and to leave out the impure. 2. A person will not be 
taken to task for an oath that is taken unintentionally but will be taken to task for an oath taken, to do or not to do some¬ 
thing, with a firm intention in the heart. 3. The atonement for a broken oath is to feed or clothe ten poor people, or free a 
believing slave. If a person is unable to do any of these things, then he must atone for his oath by fasting for three days. 



















| 0 


) Yr 





y> I 

vi 


o •£' a 0 4 "*- s' f ^ 9 } 9 i:£- . ^ 

*||| <yj&\ 

pC^i<X ^4===o^j 

j> ~jpJ>\j* JJ^-i-^ X^Xx AjL^^^yt 

\^Js($)xX N ^ ^ a^ ds ^53 v, 

Ja"\ 9 jjLyii \ ^iisSl V^Vf. iyX \ 


/&&% 


i? i ^Aj \ CjtS^^ S^- ^A^-*AaJ$Cxa 


i\ *\b\jJjbj^Cxa 


A^ 


@ By making alcohol and gambling seem attrac¬ 
tive, Satan’s only intention is to create hatred be¬ 
tween hearts and to turn them away from Allah’s 
remembrance and from the prayer. Will you, O be¬ 
lievers, leave these evil acts? Without doubt, leav¬ 
ing these acts is the right thing to do, so avoid them. 
@ Follow Allah and follow the Messenger by 
fulfilling the instructions of the Sacred Law and 
avoiding its prohibitions. Be careful of breaking the 
law. If you turn away from this, know that the duty 
of Messenger is only to convey to you what Allah 
has instructed him to, and He has already done so. 
If you come on to the right path it is for your own 
good. If you do wrong it will be to your detriment. 
When the prohibition of wine was revealed some 
believers desired to know the condition of their 
brothers who had passed away as Muslims prior to 
the prohibition. The following verse was then re¬ 
vealed. 

@ There is no sin on those who have faith in Allah, 
and do good actions to gain closeness to Him, for 
drinking alcohol before it was made unlawful, as 
long as they now stay away from it, being mind¬ 
ful of Allah’s anger, having faith in Him and doing 
good actions, and then increase in their awareness 
of Allah until they worship Him as if they see Him. 
Allah loves those who worship Him as if they see 
Him, because they are aware that Allah is always 
watching them. This leads believers to improve 
their actions. 

([§§) O you who have faith in Allah and follow His 
Messenger, Allah will certainly test you by giving 
you land game when you are in the state of Ihram. 
You will be able to hold the smaller game with your hands and the bigger ones with your spears. Allah will do this to 
show who fears his Creator, without having seen Him. Reward and punishment in the Afterlife will be based on people’s 
actions. Nothing is hidden from Allah. Whoever oversteps the limits, and hunts in the state of Ihram for Hajj or Umrah, 
he shall receive a painful punishment on the Day of Rising because of violating Allah’s prohibition. 

@) O you who accept Allah and practise on His laws, do not kill land game when you are in the state of pilgrim sanctity 
for Hajj or Umra. Whoever of you does so deliberately shall be liable for a punishment equivalent to the game they killed 
from camels, cattle or sheep. This will be judged by two men who are known to be upright amongst the Muslims. The 
animal that they decide shall be treated as an offering is treated, and shall be sent to Makkah to be slaughtered in the Sanc¬ 
tuary. Another option for the atonement is that the equivalent value should be distributed to the poor within the Sanctuary, 
every poor person should receive half a sa' of grain, or the fast of one day should be kept for every half sa' of grain. Allah 
has overlooked the game of the Sanctuary which were killed in the past, and the person who hunted land game in the state 
of pilgrim sanctity prior to the prohibition. If anyone repeats this, after the prohibition, then Allah will take retribution 
from them by punishing them for the same. Allah is Mighty and Powerful. He has the ability to take retribution on the 
one who goes against Him if He wishes. Nothing can stop Him from doing so. 

® Beneficial Points 

1. The consequences of all the actions of a servant - whether the good of obedience or the harm of sin -return to the 
servant alone. 

2. A person will not be sinful for performing something before it was forbidden or if he was unaware of the prohibition. 

3. Hunting is unlawful for a person in the state of pilgrim sanctity for Hajj or Umrah. 

4. One reason for Allah making certain things unlawful is so that He can test whether the servants will obey or not. 

5. The verses explain the atonement if a person in the state of pilgrim sanctity kills game. 

6 . One reason for the rules of atonement is to punish the offenders and to stop them from repeating the sin. 


lillp 4ju\ \ j XXj L S 

"72r~P ^WP^S^ j Part 7 


Al-Ma’idah 




















^]y>^\ c^o^\ X^k£===$\ li\ 6 \ | 

j^O4J^\ Ijfj $^ c3.^JOy^l^\J^JX^'4Jtt\ o^ 
^\Jaj^\ Aj Aj^ 4J^ J V^AC'\ ($)X-^ 



{§} Allah has permitted you to catch aquatic ani¬ 
mals and what the sea throws out, dead or alive, as 
a benefit for a resident or to nourish a traveller. He 
has prohibited hunting land game as long as you are 
in the state of Ihram for Hajj or Umrah. Be mindful 
of Allah by carrying out His instructions and avoid¬ 
ing His prohibitions. You will return to Him on the 
Day of Rising; and He will repay your actions. 

© Allah has made the Kaaba, the Sanctified House, 
an establishment for people, which secures their re¬ 
ligious interests (such as prayer, Hajj and Umrah) 
and their worldly interests (such as security in the 
Sanctuary and the import of different fruits). He has 
also made the sacred months (Dhu Al-Qa‘dah, Dhu 
Al-Hijjah, Muharram and Rajab) an establishment 
for people in that they are secure in these months 
from anyone fighting against them. Then He has 
made the sacrificial animals, and the garlands that 
indicate that they are being driven to the Sanctuary, 
an establishment for people in that their owners are 
secure from anyone harming them. All of this is Al¬ 
lah’s favour to you, so that you are aware that Allah 
knows everything in the heavens and the earth. His 
creation of such laws - that secure your interests 
and protect you from harm - is proof that He knows 
what is best for His servants, 
jjj) Know, O people, that Allah’s punishment for 
those who go against Him is severe; and that He is 
Forgiving and Compassionate towards those who 
repent to Him. 

@) The duty of the Messenger is only to convey 
what Allah has instructed him to. It is not his duty 
to make people accept the guidance: that is only in 
Allah’s Hands. Allah knows what you reveal and what you keep hidden, whether guidance or misguidance, and He will 
repay your actions. |f| Say, O Messenger: Bad is not the same as good, even if the bad is a large amount that impresses 
you. A large amount of something does not mean that it is best. Be mindful of Allah, O people of intellect, by leaving the 
bad and doing the good, so that you successfully achieve Paradise and are saved from the fire of Hell. (Jf| O you who 
have faith in Allah, follow His Messenger and practise His laws, do not ask your Messenger about things which you do 
not in need, and which will not be of any help to you in your religion. If you were told of such things, they would upset 
you because of the difficulty in them. If, despite the prohibition, you ask about these things, then know that revelation is 
coming down to the Prophet and they will be made clear to you. That is easy for Allah. Allah has not said certain things 
in the Qur’an, so do not ask about them. If you ask about them, you will have to follow the law that is then revealed. 
|f| A nation before you had asked about things not initially revealed to them. When they were then commanded to do 
them, they did not carry out the order; and became disbelievers as a result. |f| Allah has made livestock lawful for you 
to consume. He has not made unlawful what the idolaters declared unlawful for themselves when dedicating them to 
their idols, such as: bahlrah, a she-camel whose ear is cut after it gives birth to a certain number; or sa’ibah, a she-camel 
that is left for the idols after it reaches a certain age; or wasllah, a she-camel that gives birth to one female after another; 
or harm, a male camel stud that mates with other camels and produces a given number of offspring. Allah did not make 
any of these; but the disbelievers falsely claimed that Allah had forbidden these things. Most of the disbelievers do not 
differentiate between truth and falsehood and between the lawful and the unlawful. 

® Beneficial Points 1. It is permitted to eat animals that the sea throws out whether they are alive or dead. 2. The prin¬ 
ciple is that Allah’s symbols have come to secure benefits for His servants in this world and the Hearafter, and to remove 
harm from them. 3. The duty of a caller to Allah is to convey the message clearly. Giving of guidance is entrusted to Al¬ 
lah. 4. A person should not be impressed with abundance. The abundance of something is not an indication of its permis¬ 
sibility or purity. The indication for such is contained only in the Sacred Law. 5. When asking for a legal verdict (fatwa), 
the question should be restricted to the important facts, without adding unnecessary details. 6. The verses condemn the 
practice of the idolaters in declaring certain livestock - such as the bahlrah, sa’ibah, wasllah and haml - to be unlawful. 




Al-Ma’idah 


124 



















im 


riayaT] 




|p When it is said to these people who make up 
lies about Allah, with respect to forbidding certain 
livestock: Come towards the Qur’an that Allah re¬ 
vealed and to the path of the Messenger (peace be 
upon him), so that you can learn the lawful and the 
unlawful - they say: The beliefs, statements and ac¬ 
tions we have taken and inherited from our prede¬ 
cessors is enough for us. 

How could this be enough for them when their 
predecessors did not know anything and were not 
guided to the truth? Only the person who is more 
ignorant and misguided than them follows them. 
(Jf| O you who faith in Allah, follow His Messen¬ 
ger and practise His laws, you are only responsible 
for your own souls, so only do that which benefits 
them. Those people who are misguided, and who 
do not respond to you, will not harm you if you are 
on the right path. Being on the right path includes 
encouraging good and forbidding evil. On the Day 
of Rising, all of you will return to Allah only and 
He will tell you about what you used to do in the 
world and repay your actions. 

HI O you who faith in Allah, follow His Messen¬ 
ger and practise His laws, when death approaches 
any of you, with the appearance its signs, then call 
to witness the bequest two upright Muslim men, or 
two men from the disbelievers (if the need arises 
due to there being no Muslims; for example, if you 
are travelling at that time). If there is any doubt re¬ 
garding their testimony, keep them back after one 
of the prayers and let them both take an oath in Al¬ 
lah’s name saying, ‘We will not sell our share from 
Allah for any amount, such as by preferring a rel¬ 
ative. Also, we will not conceal any testimony for Allah that is with us’. Tell them that if they are not truthful, they will 
be sinners who go against Allah. 

@ If, after the oath is taken, it is established that the witnesses lied in their testimony or in the oath, then let two others 
who are closest to the deceased take an oath on the truth in their place. These new witnesses should take an oath by Allah 
saying, ‘Our testimony about their lying and deceit is closer to the truth than their testimony about their honesty and 
trustworthiness. We have not taken a false oath. If we do so, we will be from the wrongdoers who overstep Allah’s limits’, 
{jl These various oaths to be taken by the witnesses after the prayer (when you doubt their testimony) and the rejection 
of their testimony increases the likelihood that they will testify in the way required by the sacred law, without them 
distorting the facts deceitfully. Witnesses are more likely to give true testimony for fear that they will be disgraced if the 
heirs give conflicting testimony. 

Be mindful of Allah by not lying or being deceitful in your testimony and oath. Listen to what you are instructed to do 
and obey. Allah does not guide those who go against Him. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. If a person firmly adheres to following Allah, instructing what is right and forbidding what is wrong, according to their 
ability the misguidance of anyone will not harm them. They will not be questioned about other people, especially those 
who are astray. 

2. Writing a bequest and calling upright persons to witness the same is encouraged. 

3. The verses explain how witnesses to a bequest are to be questioned according to the sacred law. 


^ Cr*. 

9* 9-0 ^ -T s'-# q£. -0^ S' 0O } ^ 'fr 

^ Al-Ma'idah 125~ 




















\d&\ 


| >5^ <J\s ^10 

-0\ i^c^o Si^ 


<3^- ^ ^j]fi \3 ^LLssa^J Cx^====S\ 

: q^>C^S£ 3 ^^. Cy^^^Crt 

P^6W^ 

)y~$* $ '^3 0 Oit1 

0 ^ j^L\-^4 \[j2 \j V^a \» ff \S ci 

<i\T) ^2^-^ C$ 

/ rU^^9 O^ Aj y °U\j0^< 

0 (SiXg^i'^ C/tS^^ Oy^j Ixj3 J3 0^^3oj 



(jp Remember, O people, the Day of Rising when 
Allah will gather all the messengers and ask them 
how their communities had responded to them? 

They will assign the answer to that question to 
Allah and say, ‘I have no knowledge. You have all 
knowledge, our Lord. You are the only one Who 
knows all things that are present or absent’. 

@) Remember when Allah addressed Jesus (peace 
be upon him) and told him to remember Allah’s fa¬ 
vour to him when He created him without a father; 
to his mother, Mary (peace be upon her), when He 
chose her over all the women of her time; and upon 
him when He strengthened him with Gabriel (peace 
be upon him.). Allah told him that he used to speak 
to people as a baby, calling them to Allah; and that 
he used to speak to them in his adulthood, telling 
them what Allah had sent him with. Allah reminded 
him of the favour of being taught how to write; and 
that He taught him the Torah that He had revealed 
to Moses (peace be upon him) and the Gospel that 
He revealed to him. He was reminded of the favour 
of being taught the secrets of the sacred law and 
its benefits and wisdom. Allah reminded him of 
how he would make the shape of a bird from clay, 
blow into it and it used to become a living bird. He 
used to cure the person who was bom blind, and 
he would treat the leper and heal his skin. He also 
used to bring the dead to life by praying to Allah 
to give them life. All of this happened with Allah’s 
permission. Another favour that Allah reminded 
him about was that Allah protected him from the 
Israelites when they intended to kill him after he 
brought to them clear miracles. The only thing they 
could do was to deny them; and they said, ‘Jesus has brought nothing but plain sorcery’. 

HI Another favour that Allah reminded him about was that Allah created assistants for him when He inspired the disciples 
to have faith in Him and in Jesus. They submitted to that and responded saying, ‘I believe. Be a witness, O our Lord, that 
we submit to You in devotion’. 

(jj Remember when the disciples said, ‘Can you call on your Lord to send down a table from the sky?’ Jesus (peace be 
upon him) responded to them by telling them to be mindful of Allah and not to ask for such a thing, as it may prove to be 
a trial for them. He said to them, ‘Place your trust in your Lord in seeking provision, if you are truly believers’. 

HI The disciples said to Jesus, ‘We want to eat from this table, so that our hearts are satisfied about Allah’s perfect power 
and that you are His Messenger: to know for certain that you have told us the truth about what you have brought from 
Allah and to be witnesses to it for those people who are not present’. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Allah will gather the entire creation, whether honourable or not, on the Day of Judgement. 

2. Jesus (peace be with him) was human and he performed physical miracles such as bringing the dead to life and curing 
the person who was bom blind and the leper. 

3. The aim of the miracles of the prophets is to strengthen their followers and to silence their opponents. But it must be 
remembered that these miracles are not from the prophets themselves, but occur only with Allah’s permission. 


















| o jjLU 

YV 




c^l25j)j\j dic~i aS\ *J 

(3^4j^\ 

(^) {J\js\l?k\ ^\ -Xi3-\ J A) AC-\ *^j \*j\ AsC- jA j AcA 

cA $'xJ£-\ o^Ui oA5 caA 
<JjM cA c^o£^* aa\ o 



i* 


(3\-^ioj 4S~^p-\jO J icls d^o\ .LJ^d ,j^t« 

^cisU JLJsi tiUjj^'S^ 

cA^ji^JJ <Jj 4^\ ^ J^p\ Q)^j L$ir^ \. 

«^j CA>^ <S^J* aV^ \ A^^-^ 

0*2 ii 

£^p?\XJtsio& J\S($) C^\ ^Aj\^ 


6^ 




Jesus gave in to their request and prayed to Allah 
saying, ‘Our Lord, send down to us a table of food, 
so that we can hold a festival on the day it comes 
down in order to honour You out of gratitude. It will 
also be a sign and proof of Your Oneness and of the 
truth of what I have been sent with. Give us such 
provision that will help us worship You. You, O our 
Lord, are the best provider’. 

@ Allah answered the prayer of Jesus (peace be 
upon him) and said that He would send down the ta¬ 
ble that they had requested. He also told him that if 
anyone disbelieves after the table is sent down then 
they should blame only themselves, and that Allah 
will punish them with a severe punishment, unlike 
any other: due to them seeing an overwhelming 
proof and any denial being the result of stubborn¬ 
ness. Allah fulfilled His promise and sent down the 
table to them. 

(@ Remember that Allah will address Jesus son 
of Mary (peace be with him) on the Day of Ris¬ 
ing and ask him whether he told people to worship 
him and his mother besides Allah. Jesus will reply, 
declaring Allah’s purity, ‘It was not right for me to 
tell them anything but the truth. If I had said that 
You would know it, because nothing is hidden from 
You. You know what I keep hidden within myself, 
but I do not know what is with You. You are the 
only one who knows everything that is hidden and 
everything that is apparent’. 

@ Jesus will say to His Lord, ‘I only told people 
what you instructed me to tell them: to worship You 
alone. For as long as I remained amongst them I 
watched over what they were saying. When my 
term ended and I was raised to the sky alive, You, O Lord, were watching their actions. You are a witness to everything 
and nothing is hidden from You; so You know what I said to them and what they said after me’. 

|!| If you punish them, O Lord, they are your servants and You can do with them as You wish. If You graciously forgive 
those of them who had faith, nothing can stop You from doing so because You are the Mighty, Who cannot be overpow¬ 
ered, and the Wise in Your handling of matters. 

(jfj) Allah will say to Jesus (peace be with him) that the Day of Rising is a day on which the truthfulness of those who were 
true in their intentions, statements and actions will be of benefit to them. They will receive gardens with palaces and trees 
overlooking flowing streams, in which they will live eternally, with death never coming to them. Allah will be pleased 
with them and will never become angry with them. They will pleased with Allah because of the everlasting delight they 
have received. Such reward and pleasure is the supreme success, which cannot be equalled by any other. 

@) Allah alone controls the heavens and the earth, and everything within them. He is their Creator and the One Who 
handles their affairs. He has power over everything and nothing can overpower Him. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Allah warns those who persist in disbelief and stubbornness after clear proof has been established against them. 

2. The Messiah (peace be with him) is declared innocent of the claim of the Christians that he informed them that he is 
Allah or the son of Allah or that he claimed lordship or divinity. 

3. On the Day of Rising, Allah will question even the prophets who were the most noble and the greatest amongst people, 
so what about those who are below them in rank? 

4. The verses show the great virtue of truthfulness and Allah’s praise for those who are truthful. They also show the ben¬ 
efit that truthfulness will bring on the Day of Judgement for those who were truthful. 


1 




















Livestock (Surah Al-An‘am) 


I \ 


HA 


&3*5£i \ 




Themes of the Surah 

The rational proof for the belief of monotheism and 
a refutation of idolatry in beliefs is explained. 

® Explanation 

(JfJ) Only Allah, Who created the heavens and the 
earth from nothing, is described with perfection 
and praised with the noblest of qualities, and love 
is only due to Him. He created the night and the 
day, which follow one another. He created the night 
for darkness and the day for light. Despite all this, 
some of His servants disbelieve Him and associate 
partners with Him. Allah is far above what they say. 

(Sj) He, may He be glorified, is the One Who creat¬ 
ed you, O people, from clay when He created your 
father, Adam (peace be upon him) from it. Then He, 
may He be glorified, fixed a period for your stay in 
the life of the world. He also fixed another term, 
which only He knows, when He will raise you back 
to life on the Day of Rising. Despite this, you still 
doubt about His ability to raise you back to life. 

@ He, may He be glorified, is the One worthy of 
worship in the heavens and the earth. He knows the 
intentions, statements and actions you keep hidden 
and those you make public; and He will judge you 
about them. 

(0) No proof or miracle from their Lord comes to 
the idolaters except that they ignore it without pay¬ 
ing any attention. Clear evidences and proof of the 
Oneness of Allah, as well as miracles proving the 
truthfulness of the messengers, have now come to 
them; yet despite this, they turned away and paid no 
attention to these signs and miracles. 

© While they have turned away from these clear evidences and proofs, they had previously turned away from something 
even clearer: they denied the Qur’an that Muhammad (peace be upon him) brought. They will soon realise, when they 
see the punishment on the Day of Rising, that what they used to mock and what he brought to them was in fact the truth. 
© Do these disbelievers not know Allah’s custom of destroying communities who do wrong? Allah had destroyed, prior 
to them, many communities whom He had established in the earth with more stability than them. Allah sent down succes¬ 
sive rains upon them and made rivers flow beneath their homes; yet they then went against Him, so He destroyed them 
because of the sins they committed. Then, after them, He established other communities. 

@ If we had sent down to you, O Messenger, a book written on paper and they had seen it with their eyes, they would 
not have accepted it out of stubbornness and denial; and they would have said, ‘What you have brought is nothing more 
than clear magic; and we will never believe in it’. 

These disbelievers said, ‘We will believe if Allah sends down an angel with Muhammad (peace be upon him) who 
speaks to us and bears witness that he is a messenger’. If we send down an angel of the kind they wish, we will destroy 
them if they do not believe; and they will not be given time to repent. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The verses show the extreme stubbornness of the disbelievers and their persistence in disbelief despite the establish¬ 
ment of proof against them by means of tangible evidence. 

2. Humankind is reminded of how Allah dealt with past people in order to know the causes of their destruction, so as to 
avoid doing the same. 


^ 

\ lJu^3\3 
%y> 

^ Al-AiVam 


128 


w 
























\ 




Z H ^k&&jfr.\ 3 p%5 d 0,i 

jji js jf^l \j oyLjii\ l|U o^l^O 

^^pSl 




I L6-^ 

I ly* 33 5>==^ 3 

'b\S\Cv& 


JxiV\ cj* cy3^3j ^ 

jAJ^)X&3 y.,jy* (^ j J^ aJl) 

<iLl^-^> d)l? ($) cA-^ \3p^ \ cstt'i? 

! 1?^ 


^p) If I had sent an angel to them, I would have 
made him in the form of a man, so that they could 
listen and learn from him, as they would not be able 
to learn from an angel in the original form that I 
created him. If I had made him in the form of a 
man, they would have been confused about him. 
(j| If these people poke fun at you by asking for an 
angel to be sent down with you, then communities 
in the past also poked fun at their messengers. Then 
the punishment, which they used to deny and mock 
when they were warned about it, surrounded them. 
@ Say, O Messenger, to these people who deny 
and mock you: Travel on earth and then think about 
what happened to those who disbelieved in Allah’s 
messengers. Allah’s punishment fell upon them af¬ 
ter they were in a position of strength and power. 
@ Say to them, O Messenger, ‘To whom does do¬ 
minion of the heavens and the earth, and whatever 
is between them, belong?’ Say: Their total control 
belongs to Allah. He has established mercy upon 
Himself out of grace for His servants, and will 
therefore not rush to punish them. If they do not 
repent, He will gather them together on the Day of 
Rising, a day about which there is no doubt. Those 
who have lost their souls by bringing them to the 
point of destruction, due to their disbelief in Allah, 
will not believe and rescue their souls from loss. 
@ To Allah alone belongs dominion of everything. 
Whatever rests hidden in the night and whatever 
moves about openly in the day are all His servants 
and His creation: they are all under His domination 
and control. He hears their statements and knows 
their actions, and will judge by them. 

@ Say, O Messenger, to the idolaters who worship idols and other things together with Allah: Does it make sense that 
I take any one other than Allah as a guardian and a protector from whom I seek help? Allah is the One Who created the 
heavens and the earth without any precedent. There was no Creator before Him. He is the One Who gives provision to 
whichever of His servants He wishes, and none of His servants provide for Him. He is not in any need of His servants, 
but His servants are in need of Him. Say, O Messenger: My Lord has instructed me to be the first one from this nation to 
submit and be humble. He has prohibited me from being of those who associate others as partners with Him. 

@ Say, O Messenger: If I go against Allah by committing that which He has prohibited (such as associating partners with 
Him) or by leaving out what He has instructed me to do (such as having faith and doing good actions), then I fear that He 
will punish me with a severe punishment on the Day of Rising. 

@ The person from whom Allah keeps away and removes the punishment on the Day of Rising has attained success 
through the mercy of Allah. Such salvation and safety from the punishment is a clear victory which no other victory can 
equal. 

{Jj) If any calamity from Allah afflicts you, O son of Adam, there is no one who can remove it from you besides Allah. If 
any good from Him comes to you, there is no one who can stop Him from that. There is no one who can hold back Allah’s 
grace. He has power over everything and nothing can overpower Him. 

(J) He is the One Who is powerful and dominant and nothing can overpower or defeat Him: everything is subservient to 
Him. He is above His servants as His appropriate for Him, may He be glorified. His is the Wise in His creating, handling 
of matters and institution of laws. He is the Aware and nothing is hidden from Him. 

^ Beneficial Points: 

1. The wisdom of Allah’s sending messengers of the same species as those to whom they were sent is that it is more 
effective with respect to their listening, paying heed and accepting the message. 2. People are called to consider that a 
repetition of the ways of the people of the past with regards to disobedience may result in a repetition of Allah’s system 
of dealing with them in the form of punishment. 3. It is necessary to be afraid of sin and its consequences. 4. Only Allah 
can remove a calamity that affects a person and only Allah can stop any good from reaching a person.There is no one who 
can hold back Allah’s grace and no one who can stop His favour. 





















,»tiSIlSyi 


ir- 






Si^j£ *\i\ 0£^_' 


tS> 


>\ \ V 

A -L£r*i 



j>\j^UGj 4^Vj\^\s ^VSi j£ 



*5 J ■> ^ x 

tXM^ 


{§} Say, O Messenger, to the idolaters who deny 
you: Which thing is greatest and most honoured 
as a witness to my truthfulness? Say: Allah is the 
greatest and most honoured witness to my truth¬ 
fulness. He is a witness between you and me. He 
knows what I have brought to you and how you re¬ 
spond. Allah has revealed this Qur’an to me to warn 
you by it and to warn any human or jinn it reaches. 

You, O idolaters, believe that there are others wor¬ 
thy of worship together with Allah. Say, O Mes¬ 
senger: I do not bear witness to what you have ac¬ 
knowledged as it is false. Allah is only one Allah: 

He has no partner. I am free from all that you asso¬ 
ciate as partners with Him. 

(jp The Jews who were given the Torah and the 
Christians who were given the Gospel recognise 
the Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him) com¬ 
pletely, just as they recognise their own children 
from other children. They are the ones who have 
lost their own souls by making them enter the fire 
of Hell, and they will not believe. 

(jp The greatest wrongdoer is the person who attrib¬ 
utes a partner to Allah and worships him together 
with Allah, or the person who denies Allah’s words 
that He revealed to His Messenger. Those who do 
wrong by ascribing partners to Allah and denying 
His verses will never succeed if they do not repent. 

(jp Remember the Day of Rising when I will gather 
them all together, not leaving any one of them out, 
and criticise those who worshipped others besides 
Allah: ‘Where are your partners that you used to 
claim were partners to Allah?’ 

(jp After this test, they will have no excuse and they 
will declare themselves free of what they worshipped, by dishonestly saying: By Allah, our Lord, we did not associate 
partners with You in the world; but we had faith in You and we accepted Your Oneness. 

(jp Look, O Muhammad, how these people lied about themselves by denying that they associated partners with Allah. The 
partners that they set-up with Allah in this worldly life have disappeared and deserted them. 

@ Some of the idolaters listen to you, O Messenger, when you recite the Qur’an, but they do not benefit from what 
they hear because I have placed covers on their hearts so that they cannot understand the Qur’an. I did this due to their 
stubbornness and their turning away. I have made their ears deaf to beneficial listening. Despite the clear indications and 
glaring evidences that they see, they still do not believe, such that when they come to you they present false arguments 
against the truth and say: What you have brought has simply been taken from the books of the earlier people. 

(Sjj) These idolaters forbid people from accepting the Messenger as they themselves stay away from doing so: they do not 
let others benefit in the same way that they themselves do not benefit. By acting like this, they only destroy themselves; 
but they fail to realise that they are bringing about destruction. 

(jp If you, O Messenger, could only see them when they will be exposed to the fire of Hell on the Day of Rising, and they 
will regretfully say, ‘If only we could be sent back to the world, not deny Allah’s words and be from those who had faith 
in Allah’, then you would see a remarkable sight of their trouble. 

Beneficial Points: 

1. The verses explain the wisdom behind sending the Prophet (s) with the Qur’an in order to convey and explain the 
message. Calling towards Allah’s oneness was the most significant part of this. 

2. The verses negate Allah having any partner and refutes the fabrications of the idolaters in this regard. 

3. The verses explain that the Jews and Christians actually recognised the Prophet (peace be upon him), despite their 
external rejection and disbelief. 




























\r\ 




o^-^jQ ji\ \^ofe\sJ 0 

^ G. o -- 

\3vi& jlSj^i; ( ^p'y j 4j i\S^j 0 Zf$J*^i 

Z^\\}j%l^jy^\l^i 

tyj&s-^si 0 1 




A^*> 


L-P jJ \ \ l 'fij (Q &jjy\j* «L!N \j& j>4^^ I 

i dJtjAid?^ iiij_y>Ci _.Aj^pj>o j 3Q j 
=> lGb0Oj X~>-t£.jA& | 

L$+{^ cS^i <j£ 4^\ 

g\ oi£Li\ g^5^ Ofi£ ($) | 
^jii\J^tJLi 3 ^ c&L)^^iSy^ j 

^ l£-A.^\ 4J^ 


Ip Their saying that they would believe if sent back 
is a lie. Instead the statement that they used to keep 
hidden, which was ‘By Allah, we were not idola¬ 
ters,’ has appeared to them when their limbs gave 
testimony against them. If they were supposedly 
sent back to the world, they would return to the dis¬ 
belief and associating partners with Allah that they 
had been prohibited from. So they are lying in their 
promise that they will believe if they are sent back. 
(@ These idolaters say, ‘There is no life but the life 
we presently have and we will not be raised to give 
account’. 

(j| If you, O Messenger, could only see when those 
who denied the resurrection will be made to stand 
before their Lord, you would see a remarkable 
sight of their trouble when Allah will say to them: 
Is this resurrection that you used to deny not the 
truth about which there is no doubt? They will say: 
I swear by our Lord Who created us, it is certainly 
true and there is no doubt about it. Allah will then 
say to them: Taste the punishment that is a result of 
your denial of this day, which you used to reject in 
the life of the world. 

@ Those who deny the resurrection on the Day 
of Rising, and regard standing before Allah to be 
farfetched, are in utter loss. Until, when the Hour 
comes upon them suddenly without any prior 
knowledge, they will say, because of extreme re¬ 
gret: Alas for us and what disappointment, due to 
our having been neglectful of Allah by disbelieving 
Him and not preparing for the Day of Rising. They 
will carry their evil actions on their backs. How ter¬ 
rible are those evil actions that they carry! 

The life of the world that you incline towards is nothing but a play and deception for a person who does not perform 
actions to please Allah. The home of the Afterlife is better for those who are mindful of Allah: doing what He has instruct¬ 
ed them to do (such as having faith and following Him) and avoiding what He has prohibited (such as associating partners 
with Him and committing sin). Do you, idolaters, not understand this, so that you can believe and do good actions? 

(jp) I know that their outer denial of you, O Messenger, upsets you. Know that inside they do not deny you, because they 
know your truthfulness and honesty. Instead, they are people who do wrong because of their rejection of Allah’s words 
and they therefore dislike what you have brought and deny it on the outside. 

Do not think that such a denial is only in relation to what you have brought. Messengers before you were also denied 
and harmed by their communities, but they faced this with patience in their calling towards Allah and striving in His path 
until help came to them from Allah. No one can hold back the help that Allah has written and promised to His messengers. 
Information about the messengers before you and the difficulties they faced in their communities, and information about 
the help that Allah gave them by destroying their enemies, has come to you, O Messenger. 

@ If their denial and turning away from the truth you have brought is difficult for you, O Messenger, then see if you can 
find a tunnel into the ground or a ladder into the sky so that you may bring them more proof in addition to what I have 
already given you. If Allah willed to guide them to the guidance that you brought, He would have done so. However, He 
has not willed this because of His wisdom. So do not be among those who are ignorant of this and lose yourself in regret 
over their denial. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Allah, in His justice, will gather the worshipper and the one worshipped as well as the follower and the one followed 
on the plains of resurrection to testify against one another. 2. Not every one who listens to the Qur’an benefits from it. 
Sometimes there is an obstacle to this such as the sealing of the heart, deafness or the like. 3. The verses explain that even 
though the idolaters outwardly reject the Prophet (s), inwardly they are certain of his truthfulness. 4. The Prophet (peace 
be upon him) is consoled by being informed that the denial of his prophethood did not only occur to him, but previous 
idolaters acted in the same way with previous prophets as well. 


- 


Al-An‘am 


131 

















4 J^ o\J^\Sj (^} by^y 





OTO 




5o\i3j/ 




■>6^ 

^ t <: 

j^tiA 

j* 


py^crt 


Js 0 ^ r iL^ :; w^ l ^p yyyyyj yyk y>\ 

yyjy yyyy^^y yy y\y^<y\ 

t- o . ^y ^s, oj^-y 3 o\j\ y. $ cf£^r a . ’j>y£i 
uL*i3\ 3j4?($1i1)^/^Va o3"^-L$«Lj 

j>yy yy^y « la 3 \j x^y oys c^y 

;U 


-»M2 


@ Only those who listen to the speech and under¬ 
stand it will respond to what you have brought. The 
disbelievers are dead and worthless because their 
hearts have died. Allah will raise the dead on the 
Day of Rising and then they will be returned to Him 
for Him to repay their actions. 

@ The idolaters make stubborn demands and de¬ 
lay acceptance of faith, and say: Why has no ex¬ 
traordinary sign been sent down to Muhammad as a 
proof from His Lord about the truth of what he has 
brought? Say, O Messenger: Allah is able to send 
down a sign as you wish, but most of these idola¬ 
ters, who demand that a sign be sent down, do not 
know that signs are only sent down in accordance 
with Allah’s wisdom and not according to their de¬ 
mands. If He was to send it down and they still did 
not believe, then He would destroy them, 
j^j) There is no animal on earth or any bird flying 
in the sky except that they are species like you, O 
children of Adam, with respect to their creation 
and provision. I have not left out anything in the 
Preserved Tablet. The knowledge of all of them is 
with Allah. Then they will all be gathered to their 
Lord on the Day of Rising for the final decision and 
each will be recompensed according to what they 
deserve. 

@ Those who deny our verses are like those who 
are deaf and cannot hear, and like those who are 
dumb and cannot speak. Together with this they 
are in total darkness, in which they cannot see. So 
how can such a person be guided? Allah misguides 
whomever He wills from among people and guides 
whomever He wills by placing such a person on a 
straight path that has no crookedness. 

(Sj| Say, O Messenger, to these idolaters: Tell me, if a punishment from Allah comes to you or if the Hour that you have 
been promised comes to you, will you call on anyone besides Allah at that time to remove the calamity and difficulty that 
has come upon you? This is if you are truthful that those whom you worship can bring benefit and remove harm. 

@ The truth is that when the Hour comes you not call anyone besides Allah Who created you, and He removes the 
calamity and takes away harm as He is worthy of that and able to do so, if He so wills. As for what you worshipped as 
Allahs, you will leave them because you know that they cannot bring benefit nor cause harm. I sent messengers to 
many communities before you, O Messenger, but those communities denied their messengers and turned away from 
what they brought. I then tried them with poverty and sickness in order for them to submit and humble themselves before 
their Lord. @ If only they had humbled themselves before Allah, when His calamity came to them, and begged Allah to 
remove the calamity, then He would have shown them mercy. But they did not do that. Instead, their hearts became hard 
and they did not take notice and learn a lesson. Satan made the disbelief and sins that they were committing seem good to 
them, so they continued with those actions. @ When they ignored the warning of extreme poverty and sickness, and did 
not follow Allah’s instructions, He enticed them further away from the truth by opening the doors of provision to them, 
and giving them wealth after they were poor. He also blessed them with good health after they had suffered sickness. This 
continued until they were steeped in their pride and enjoyment of life; then His punishment came upon them suddenly, 
and they were overtaken by despair and lost all hope. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The disbelievers are likened to those who are dead because life in reality is the life of the heart when it accepts the truth 
and follows the path of guidance. 2. Part of Allah’s wisdom with respect to calamities is that He sends them down on 
those who disobey Him in order to soften their hearts and bring them back to their Lord. 3. The possession of wealth and 
blessings by those who are astray does not indicate that Allah loves them. It is merely a means of His enticing them and 
a test for them as well as others besides them. 4. A proof of Allah’s lordship is that if Allah took away people’s hearing 
and sight, they would not be able to restore them. 


0. 

















1 

r-'i 


( ^ ) l l* yjj\ g&\j\$ 

Ijj^stL^ iiiA j^-\ o\ lioJS 






o < 


4J^\ C_-^ «AC^J^^Lo\ ^)\ •>-_ 

U?(&) ^ \ Ja \j-4pr j\ Ariq 

0^*0^ 

c^]j 

j^=^ j/\ S! ^5 (^) O^Liijj \y'^U j <4>\ jC^ 

c!^-^ V^-"5 0^ 

j^fe-^4 j oj^5i|\ ^3 a5s<$> o 

oj JjiVi ^4-L) 0^3^£^\ pJiiS]j(^) 
dlAlI^-^^Wj %^e?> o%p^\^^Cyt ci^flcLa 3^pr^ 
J\fy®.0*^=C9 >-A 3jJsC$ Cj^j^r^ 


H^5j_ 


Al-An‘am 


133 


@ The last of the disbelievers was cut off by being 
wiped out altogether when the help came to Allah’s 
messengers. Thanks and praise is only for Allah, 
the Lord of the Worlds, for destroying His enemies 
and helping His friends. 

@ Say, O Messenger, to these idolaters: Tell me, 
if Allah has to make you deaf by taking away your 
hearing, make you blind by taking away your sight, 
and seal your hearts so that you do not understand 
anything, what other being deserving worship is 
there that will bring all of these back to you? Think, 
O Messenger, about how we explain the evidence 
to them in various ways, yet they still turn away 
from it. 

@ Tell me, if Allah’s punishment comes to you 
suddenly without your realizing it, or if it comes to 
you openly before your eyes, then is it not so that 
only those who do wrong by disbelieving Allah and 
His messengers will be destroyed, and only those 
who have faith in Allah and follow His messengers 
will be saved. 

@ I send our messengers only to inform the people 
of faith and obedience of the glad tidings of ever¬ 
lasting delight that will never end, and to warn the 
people of disbelief and sin of My severe punish¬ 
ment. Whoever accepts the messengers and sets 
right his actions, they will have no fear for what 
awaits them in the Afterlife, nor will they grieve 
over the pleasures of the world that they missed. 
@ Those who deny our signs will be afflicted by 
the punishment because they opposed Allah. If they 
had not gone against Him, but fulfilled His instruc¬ 
tions and stayed away from His prohibitions, then 


the punishment would not have afflicted them. 

{j§J) Say, O Messenger, to these idolaters: I do not say to you that I have with me Allah’s treasures of provision and that I 
can do with them as I please. I also do not say to you that I know the Ghaib, besides the revelation that Allah has shown 
me. I also do not say to you that I am an angel. I am the Messenger of Allah and I only follow what is revealed to me. I 
do not claim that which is not right for me. Is the disbeliever whose sight is blind to the truth equal to the believer who 
sees the truth and has faith in it? Do you, idolaters, then not think about the signs around you? 

@ Warn, O Messenger, with this Qur’an those who fear that they will be gathered to their Lord on the Day of Rising, 
when they will have no friend besides Allah to bring them any benefit, nor any intercessor to remove hann from them, so 
that they may be mindful of Allah by fulfilling His instructions and avoiding His prohibitions. These are the people who 
will benefit from the Qur’an. 

@ O Messenger, do not remove from your gathering those poor Muslims who sincerely worship Allah in the beginning 
and at the end of the day. Do not chase them away in order to win favour with the leaders of the idolaters. You are in no 
way accountable for these poor people. It is only Allah Who will take them to account. They, too, are in no way account¬ 
able for you. If you drive them away from your gathering, you will be of those who overstep Allah’s limits. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Prophets are human beings and have no attributes of lordship whatsoever. Their task is to convey the message. They 
have no control over the creation, nor do they know the unseen. They also have no control over the treasures of provision 
and the like. 

2. A caller to Allah must show concern for his followers, especially those weak ones amongst them who only seek the 
truth. He must bring them close and must not distance them in order to please the disbelievers. 






















@ So I tested them by means of one another. I made 
some of them rich and others poor. I made them dif¬ 
ferent with respect to their worldly fortunes. I test¬ 
ed them in this way so that the rich disbelievers say 
about the poor believers: Are these poor people the 
ones whom Allah has favoured with guidance from 
amongst us? If this faith was any good, then they 
would not have beaten us to it, because we are the 
people who come first. 

Does Allah not know those who are thankful for 
His favours, so He guides them to faith, from those 
who deny these favours, so He abandons them to 
disbelief? Certainly, Allah knows about them. 

@ When those who accept My signs that indicate 
the truth of what you have brought come to you, O 
Messenger, then reply to their greeting of peace in 
honour of them and tell them the good news of My 
mercy. I have gracefully made mercy obligatory on 
Myself. If anyone among you commits sin, out of 
ignorance and foolishness, and then repents from 
that sin and sets their actions right, then I will for¬ 
give them, for I am Forgiving and Compassionate 
to the servant who repents to Me. 

So just as I have explained what was previously 
mentioned, I explain to you the Qur’an to make the 
truth clear for the sake of practicing it; and to make 
clear the path of the guilty ones, so that it can be 
avoided. 

@ Say, O Messenger, ‘Allah has prohibited me 
from worshipping those whom you worship besides 
Him’. Say, O Messenger: I do not follow your de¬ 
sires in worshipping other than Allah. If I had fol¬ 
lowed your desires, I would go astray from the path 
of truth and I would not be guided to it. This is the condition of any person who follows his desires without any proof 
from Allah. 

@) Say, O Messenger, to these idolaters: I stand on clear evidence from my Lord, not on vain desires, yet you have denied 
this evidence. I do not have the punishment and the extraordinary signs that you demand and that you are in such haste 
to bring about. That is only in Allah’s control. The decision for anything, including what you demand, is only Allah’s. 
He speaks the truth and decides accordingly. Allah, may He be glorified, is the best of those who decide between truth 
and falsehood. 

O Messenger, say to them: If I had in my possession the punishment that you are in such haste to bring about, I would 
have brought it down on you. If that happens, the matter between us will be settled. Allah knows best about the duration 
of respite for those who do wrong and He knows best when to punish them. 

@ The treasures of the Ghaib are with Allah alone: no one besides Him knows them. He knows all the created things in 
the land, such as animals, plants and inanimate objects. He knows whatever animals or plants there are in the sea. No leaf 
falls in any place, nor is there any seed of grain hidden in the earth, nor any thing moist or dry, except that it is recorded 
in a clear book which is the Preserved Tablet. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Allah makes some of His servants a test for others and they therefore differ in their levels of provision and in their 
disbelief and faith. Disbelief and faith are not related to the abundance of provision or the lack thereof. 

2. One of the qualities of a caller to Allah is that he has a cheerful countenance and that he brings cheer and happiness to 
his companions. 

3. A caller to Allah must avoid following lowly desires as regards to his belief, method and conduct. 

4. Only Allah has knowledge of the Ghaib and His knowledge in this regard is vast: He misses nothing and nothing of His 
creation is hidden from Him. Everything is recorded with Him, including the smallest details. 


i+i yy oT "T ? ‘“.t'T ■> \ v f 

( op ^0 AjsO 

La L> A_^pA_a (Jp (jS AoLj 'j,\ J 




Al-An‘am 

134 Part 7 j 


















4 

1 


^0 ^l_^p <3 j^JaLjjJ ^S3~l4 

us^^o 5 

ly^}cL^ 5^ e^Us> 

(J^ ($) ifS>^ Cjtif^^ ^5^ 
02$.<^£D ^\l2VJ& 

> (3\Ajj \»^JZ>j Cl*^* 




^ rvaX-i^jiaj' 


A: 


t?.f ^ *X ^7^- | 


@ Allah is the One Who temporarily takes away 
your souls at night as you sleep, and He is the One 
Who knows the actions you do during the day when 
you are awake. He then raises you in the day, after 
taking away your souls through sleep, so that you 
may carry out your tasks. This will continue until 
the fixed period of your lives, as known to Allah, is 
over. Then you will return to Him alone when He 
will raise you on the Day of Rising. He will then 
tell you about what you used to do in the life of the 
world and will repay your actions. 

@ And Allah is the Dominant and Irresistible to 
Whom everything is subjugated. He is above His 
servants in a manner that befits His majesty, may 
He be glorified. He sends over you, O people, hon¬ 
ourable angels who record your actions. This will 
continue until a person’s life is brought to an end 
by the angel of death and his aides take away their 
souls. The angel of death and his aides never fail to 
carry out what they are instructed to do. 

(jp Then all those whose souls were taken away 
will be returned to Allah, their real master, for Him 
to repay their actions. To Him belongs the effectual 
decision and fair judgement between them. He is 
the swiftest of those who take account as He will 
take all of them to account in one day. 

@ Say, O Messenger, to these idolaters: Who res¬ 
cues you and saves you from the calamity? You call 
on Him alone, humbling yourselves in secret and 
in public saying: If our Lord delivers us from this 
destruction we will certainly be of those who show 
thanks for His favours on us and we will not wor¬ 
ship anyone besides Him. 

@ Say to them, O Messenger, ‘Allah is the One Who rescues you from it and delivers you from every distress. Then you 
still associate others as partners with Him when you are in good times. What can be more wrong than this? 

(jp) Say to them, O Messenger: Allah is the One able to send upon you a punishment that will come to you from above, 
such as stones, thunder-bolts and floods, or that will come to you from below, such as earthquakes and sinking into the 
ground. He can also cause disunity between your hearts, making each person follow their desire and making you fight 
one another. 

Think, O Messenger, about how I explain to them the evidence in various ways, so that they realise that what you have 
brought to them is the truth and what they have is false. 

@ Your people have denied this Qur’an, yet it is the truth about which there is no doubt that it is from Allah. Say to them, 
O Messenger: I am not responsible for your actions. I am only to warn you before a severe punishment. 

Everything has a time in which it occurs and an end point which it reaches. This includes your end results. You will 
soon come to know them when you are raised on the Day of Rising. 

(jp) When you, O Messenger, see the idolaters speaking about My verses mockingly, then do not sit with them until they 
enter into a discussion free of such mockery. If Satan makes you forget, and you do sit with them and afterwards remem¬ 
ber, then leave that gathering and do not sit with those who overstep the limits. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Sleep is a form of death and souls are taken away at the time of sleep and are returned upon awakening. 

2. Allah’s divinity is proved by innate nature. The disbelievers, by their natural inclination, believe in Allah and return to 
Him at the time of extreme need and sure destruction, and then ask of Him alone. 

3. The conduct of the idolaters is used as a proof against them and evidence is established against the transformation in 
their nature by their seeking Allah’s assistance at sea at the time of difficulty and thereafter associating partners with Him 
when He saves them and brings them to the shore. 

4. It is not permissible to sit in the gatherings of the people of falsehood and nonsensical talk. A person must leave such 
company and not return to them until they stop such talk. 


4 


^ . 4j 




Al-An‘am 


135 























Sj fcljtfi&SXj&k; 0JCJ 


| ^X45\ v^l« A_=*3 > _' s i iJ-Lc- (_x=j jja cAj ^ - 3^ »S?5 

| d)Ji d Xf^l (1) \ ^l^=a \X/^X) i_l>\ 

i\ XJolSAi^ *Ji\ 




»ji 






Oi/^ 



\ ^j^3\ysi jj^\ ^xa 


(j| Those who are mindful of Allah by fulfilling His 
instructions and avoiding things He has not prohib¬ 
ited are in no way responsible for anything in the 
account of these wrongdoers. Their duty is only to 
prohibit them from the evil they are doing, so that 
they also may become mindful of Allah by fulfill¬ 
ing His instructions and avoiding things He has not 
allowed. 

(jp Leave, O Messenger, these idolaters who have 
made their religion a thing of play and distraction 
and who mock and poke fun at it. The life of the 
world with its temporary pleasures has deceived 
them. Advise people, O Prophet, using this Qur’an, 
so that no soul is delivered to destruction because 
of the evil actions it has done. If it so acts, it will 
have no one to help it nor any intercessor to protect 
it against Allah’s punishment on the Day of Rising. 

If it has to offer any ransom to be saved from Al¬ 
lah’s punishment, such will not be accepted from it. 

Those are the ones who have been delivered to their 
destruction because of the sins they committed. On 
the Day of Rising, they will have a drink that will 
be extremely hot and a painful punishment because 
of their disbelief. 

@ Say, O Messenger, to these idolaters: Shall we 
worship, besides Allah, idols that have no ability 
to benefit us, nor can they harm us with? Shall we 
turn back from faith after Allah has guided us to it? 

If we do so, we will be like the one whom satans 
have misled: leaving him confused, not knowing 
the right path; and where he has companions on the 
straight path who call him to the truth, but he refus¬ 
es to respond to their call. 

Say to them, O Messenger: Allah’s guidance is the true guidance, and He has instructed us to submit to Him, may He be 
glorified, by being firm in our belief in His Oneness and by worshipping Him alone, because He is the Lord of the Worlds, 
(jp I have been instructed to establish the prayer in a complete way. I have also been instructed to be mindful of Allah 
by fulfilling His instructions and staying away from things He has prohibited. He, alone, is the One Who will gather the 
servants before Him on the Day of Rising, in order to judge them for their actions. 

He is the One Who created the heavens and the earth for a purpose. On the day when Allah will say to something ‘Be’ 
and it will become, refers to the Day of Rising when Allah will say ‘Rise’ and they will all rise. His word is the truth that 
will most certainly occur. On the Day of Rising, when the angel Israfil will blow the trumpet for a second time, all control 
will be Allah’s alone. He knows what is hidden and what can be seen. He is Wise in His creating and handling of matters. 
He is Aware about the hidden just as He knows the apparent, and nothing is hidden from Him. 

Beneficial Points: 

1. A caller to Allah is not responsible for taking anyone to account. Their duty is only to convey the message and to 
remind. 

2. One of the evidences for monotheism is that something which has no control over any benefit or harm can obviously 
not be entitled to being worshipped as a Allah besides Allah. 


L3) 




















ci-Xu^j sy>\ 

ft 

<3-^ UI1& JL^-ki& JliL^=3^ \cj L yii\ (0) 

\j\s\ V q\jja( ^ ^ j^f\JL>-\^jis |> 

^ "£ ^ ^ ^ ^ tw ^ ^ 5W1UOUVV U1 111,3 XM.W.1W tillVA 1UO ^WU^/1V, A uuu J11VVTV/U 

^p^oJ\^2/^Jp oy « Jys\ \i\s ci3 §T him the vast kingdom of the heavens and the earth, 

o/\ fV\ n f Ua /^rvnl/4 iipa fUof n n om iiA/^i/Anfirv« /xf* A 11r»V» V 


@) Remember, O Messenger, when Abraham 
(peace be upon him) said to his father, Azar, who 
was a idolater: O father, do you make the idols into 
Allahs that you worship besides Allah? I think that 
you and your people who worship idols are clear¬ 
ly misguided from and confused about the path of 
truth because of your worship of others besides 
Allah. Allah is the only Being that deserves to be 
worshipped, and nothing else has a right to be wor¬ 
shipped. 

@ In the same way I showed Abraham the mis¬ 
guidance of his father and his people, I also showed 



iJzhI \j 


^ ? ' > '£\^ A i *■"'^ ^ ^ **'&'?* 't 

24j y J jS_3 (3 * 

[iLjZ Jp Sli 


Al-An‘am 


137 


so that he could use that as an indication of Allah’s 
Oneness and of His being the only One deserving 
of worship. This also made him certain that Allah 
is One without any partner and that He has power 
over everything. 

@ When the darkness of the night came over Abra¬ 
ham, he began to debate with his people in order to 
bring them from idolatry to monotheism. His peo¬ 
ple used to worship the stars, so when he saw a star 
he said, ‘This is my Lord’, with the aim of convinc¬ 
ing his people. When the star disappeared, he said, 
‘I do not like that which disappears, because the 
true Allah is always present and never disappears’. 
The belief of his people was that Allahs do not go 
away and disappear, so he used this same belief of 
theirs as an argument against them. 

@ When Abraham saw the moon rising, he said to 
his people, ‘This is my Lord’, continuing his argu¬ 
ment against them. When it disappeared, he said, ‘If 
Allah does not guide me to His Oneness and wor¬ 
ship I will certainly become one of the people who are astray from His religion and who worship others besides Him’. 
@ When he saw the sun rising, he said to his people, ‘This thing that is rising is my Lord. It is bigger than the star and 
the moon’, further continuing his plan of argument and proof against them. When it disappeared, he said, ‘O my people, 
I am free of what you associate as partners with Allah’. 

After he had disassociated himself from everything they worshipped besides Allah, it was as if they asked him, ‘What, 
then, do you worship?’ He therefore said: 

@ I have devoted my religion to Allah Who created the heavens and the earth without any precedent, throwing off idol¬ 
atry and embracing pure monotheism. I am not one of the idolaters who worship others besides Allah. 

@ Abraham’s people, who were idolaters, disputed with him with respect to Allah’s Oneness and they threatened him 
with their idols. He said to them: Do you argue with me about Allah’s Oneness and worshipping Him alone when my 
Lord has guided me to it? I do not have any fear of your idols, because they have no ability to harm or benefit, unless 
Allah wills. Whatever Allah wills happens. Allah’s knowledge covers everything and nothing in the earth or in the heaven 
is hidden from Him. Will you, then, not be mindful, O people, and stop your disbelief and associating of partners with 
Allah and believe in Him alone? 

® How can I be fearful of the idols you worship besides Allah when you have no fear of your associating as partners 
with Allah things that He created, without having any proof for doing so? Which of the two groups, the monotheists or the 
idolaters, is more deserving of safety and security? If you know which group is more deserving, then follow that group. 
The more deserving group is undoubtedly the group of the believers who are monotheists. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Abraham’s debate with his community demonstrate true nature of Allah, His oneness, Lordship and Divinity. 

2. It is permissible to debate and use logical arguments against one’s opponent. 

3. It is permissible to put forward arguments that agree with the convictions of an opponent and then use them to make the 
opponent return to given facts, which are accepted as proceeding from that point, to establish matters of faith. 





















@ Those who believe in Allah follow His laws and 
did not pollute their faith with polytheism, they will 
be the ones who will be safe and secure. They are 
the ones to whom their Lord has shown the path of 
guidance. 

(jfj) The argument of the setting of the star, moon 
and sun, which Abraham used to defeat his people 
in the debate, is My argument, which I showed and 
gave him to use against his people. I raise in rank 
whichever of My servants I wish in this world and 
the Afterlife. Your Lord, O Messenger, is Wise in 
His creation and handling of matters, and He knows 
about His servants. 

(jp I blessed Abraham with his son Isaac and his 
grandson Jacob, and I guided each of them to the 
straight path. Before them, I guided to the path of 
truth Noah; and from the descendants of Noah, I 
guided David, his son Solomon, Job, Joseph, Mo¬ 
ses and his brother Aaron (peace be upon them). 

Just as I gave the prophets a reward for doing good, 

I will give a similar reward to all those who do 
good, even if they are not prophets. 

(j§S) In a similar way, I guided Zachariah, John, Je¬ 
sus son of Mary and Elijah (peace be upon them). 

All these prophets were of the righteous, who were 
chosen by Allah to be messengers. 

(jjj) In a similar way, I guided Ishmael, Elisha, Jo¬ 
nah, and Lot (peace be upon them). I favoured all 
of them with prophethood, with Muhammad (peace 
be upon him) being the best of them, superior to all 
other people. 

(jp I also guided some of their forefathers, descend¬ 
ants and brothers, whom I had willed to guide. I 
selected them and made them take the straight path: the path of Allah’s Oneness and His obedience. 

The guidance they received was Allah’s guidance, which He grants to whomever of His servants He wills. If they had 
associated others as partners to Allah, then their actions would be void, because associating partners with Allah nullifies 
good actions. 

@ The prophets mentioned are the ones to whom I had given divine scriptures, wisdom and prophethood. If your people 
deny any of these things which I have given to them, then I have prepared other people who do not disbelieve, but who 
accept and hold firm onto it. They are the Emigrants (Muhajirun) and the Helpers (Ansar), and all those who follow them 
in good until the Day of Reward. 

(j|J) Those prophets and their forefathers, descendants and brothers mentioned are truly the people of guidance, so follow 
and imitate them. Say, O Messenger, to your people: I do not want any reward from you for conveying this Qur’an. The 
Qur’an is simply an advice for the human beings and jinn of the worlds, so that they can be guided to the straight path 
by it. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. One of the virtues of monotheism is that it guarantees safety for the servant, especially in the afterlife at a time when 
people will be terrified. 

2. The verses establish that all the previous prophets conveyed their message through Allah’s grace and not by their 
abilities. 

3. All prophets are unanimous in inviting towards Allah’s oneness, despite their differences in sacred laws relating to 
worship. 

4. Following the prophets is a praiseworthy practice, especially with respect to the core of monotheism. 



\ \yJ\ c. <y$\ 

(^)JLAp Jy===^^-<£^>_j 

yjj Ajjb J J cri-J 

yy * h\3 0 yy 


0 x^\ 4ji\ iS (juj\ (^) 






Al-An‘am 


138 






















\r\ 


i^JjSLaj 

c^a_&j L^y c^^y 3 ^Aj A^j-lSJ^ ^ =^ \ 3)~>\ 3ft 
}3^\jc2==^ jy^j Qb j 4jj\j«$-(ji^l 


^■^V^jj^AViV^^tAhi^/V 9 9t£sjaM ^ 


*-' « -r j> %n 
&j^Aj 0>^5x 


* yy £^1 {zAi2j t^Js^ 3^3%^^===* $ 
l| <3}j\Xa (3\s I 

^5b\ \ j^^\>4jjo\ v^la-^V) ^^====cyy3 3 oji ^ oy. 


£l\3\e^ @ The idolaters did not venerate Allah as He 

should be venerated when they said to their proph¬ 
et, Muhammad (peace be upon him), ‘Allah has not 
sent down any revelation to any human being’. Say 
to them, O Messenger: Who is the One who sent 
down the Torah to Moses, as a light and guidance 
for his people? The Jews put it into sheets; and they 
show what agrees with their desires and conceal 
what does not, such as the description of Muham¬ 
mad (peace be upon him). 

You, O Arabs, were taught the Qur’an, which nei¬ 
ther you nor your predecessors knew. Say to them, 
O Messenger, ‘Allah sent it down’, then leave them 
to their ignorance and misguidance, until the most 
certain thing - death - comes to them. 

@ And this Qur’an is a book that I revealed to you, 
O Prophet. It is a blessed book that confirms the 
heavenly scriptures that came before it, and was 
revealed to you so that you could warn the people 
of Mecca and all the people in the East and West to 
come to the right path. Those who believe in the life 
of the Hereafter accept this Qur’an, practice it and 
guard their prayer by maintaining its requirements, 
essentials and recommended acts at the times set in 
the sacred law. 

@ The greatest wrongdoer is the person who 
makes up lies about Allah by saying, ‘Allah has 
not revealed anything to any human being’; or by 
falsely saying, ‘Allah has sent revelation to me’, 
when Allah did not send any revelation to him; or 
by saying, ‘I will reveal the like of the Qur’an that 
Allah has revealed’. 

O Messenger, you would see a terrible sight if you 
could see these wrongdoers at the time of death; and when the angels will stretch out their hands to punish and beat them, 
and reprimand them by saying: Remove your souls because we are here to take them. Today you will be repaid with a 
punishment that will disgrace and humiliate you because of the lies that you used to say about Allah by claiming prophet- 
hood, revelation or the ability to reveal what Allah has revealed, and because of your being too proud to accept His signs. 

They will be told on the Day of Resurrection: You have come to us today individually. Now you do not have any 
wealth or leadership, and you have come to Me just as I had created you the first time: barefoot, naked and uncircumcised. 
You have reluctantly left behind what I had given you in the world. I do not see with you today your idols, which you 
claimed will intercede for you and that they are Allah’s partners with respect to their being deserving of worship. All links 
between you have been cut. Your claim of their intercession and that they are Allah’s partners has vanished from you. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Revelation of scriptures to prophets is Allah’s practice with respect to those sent with the message. The Prophet (s) is 
also one of them. 

2. The worst liar is the one who lies about Allah and attributes or negates something with respect to Allah without any 
proper evidence. 

3. Every person will be raised on the Day of Judgement alone, stripped of all positions and titles, and each will be taken 
to account seperately. 


(^) ^>^===*3 <5^ 

























wiLssj 


*4»f 





^l^ilSS \ \i^a3 jS SS& 

#'»z »J'*lzz »j< „ ^ ' *2 * £ Af'S 

\JOLL*b* 0^>*-===»V-itA\ V^A^(wJ 

4S^ S J\S4?0^>4^ Cj4l! \ ti^ai JS 

y^j\^J^ (J&))j^l^yi3\j 2~jta 

£*p 4^'fe^ 

*§/£ ($) 5/a3p 


(jjS Allah alone is the One who splits open the seed, 
from which crops emerge, and the date-stone, from 
which the date palm sprouts. He creates the living 
from the dead, just as man and all other animals 
are formed from sperm; and He creates the dead 
from the living, just as sperm comes out of a human 
being and an egg is laid by a chicken. The Being 
who does this is Allah, the One Who created you. 

How are you, idolaters, then misled from the truth, 
despite your witnessing His marvellous creation? 

(Sjjj) He, may He be glorified, splits the light of dawn 
from the darkness of the night. He is the One Who 
has made the night still, in which people can take 
rest from the tiring and hard work of the day. He is 
the One Who has made the sun and the moon move 
according to a precise measure. That marvellous 
creation is the determination of the Mighty, Whom 
none can overpower, the One Who knows what is 
best for His creation. 

@ He, may He be glorified, is the One who created 
for you, O children of Adam, the stars in the sky, so 
that you may be guided by them during your travels 
when the routes on the land and sea are unclear. I 
have explained the proofs and evidences that indi¬ 
cate My power for a people who reflect and take 
benefit from them. 

@ He, may He be glorified, is the One Who creat¬ 
ed you from one soul, which was the soul of your 
father, Adam. He began your creation by forming 
your father, Adam, from clay and then He created 
you from him. He also created for you a place for 
you to settle in, which is the wombs of your moth¬ 
ers, and a depository in which you are stored, which 
is the loins of your fathers. I have explained the signs to a people who can understand the words of Allah. 

(Sj) He, may He be glorified, is the One Who sent down rain water from the sky and then with it He caused all types of 
vegetation to grow. From the vegetation He brought out crops and green trees, from which He produces grain that is 
packed one of top of the other, as it is found in spikes. From the spathe of the date-palm come clusters that are close to 
any person standing or sitting. He also brought out grape orchards; and produces olives and pomegranates, the leaves 
of which are similar but the fruit are different. Look, O people, at the fruit when it first appears and when it ripens. O 
people, in that there are clear proofs of Allah’s power for a people who believe in Allah. Such people are the ones who 
will benefit from these proofs. 

(|f| Yet the idolaters made the jinn partners with Allah in worship believing that the jinn can independently bring benefit 
and cause harm, whilst Allah alone had created them, so He is most worthy of being worshipped. And out of their igno¬ 
rance they attributed sons to Allah - as the Jews did with respect to ‘Uzayr’, and the Christians with respect to Jesus - and 
also daughters. Allah is free and above what the people of falsehood claim about Him. 

(jp He, may He be glorified, is the Creator of the heavens and the earth without any precedent. How can he have a child 
when he has no wife? He created everything and knows everything. Nothing is hidden from Him. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Using the evidence of creation and provision (creation of vegetation, its growth, transformation of its form and size 
and the falling of rain) to prove Allah’s oneness in His Lordship and His entitlement to divinity is something clear and 
apparent. 

2. Using the evidence of motion (motion within orbits and the arrangement and precision of such movement) to prove 
Allah’s oneness in His Lordship and His entitlement to divinity is also something clear and apparent. 

3. The verses show the misguidance and foolishness of the idolaters in worshipping the jinn. 








Al-An‘am 





















' oj 


\t\ 


l?xSs>\s 

J^=j >l 9^ J^=(ife*S 

jJ O^JjU^; 
t^'-Xj==> q(^) ^-> jaj-rj jJ===ZZXZ\Xj 
^i. cu_ 

O^L»i \ < ^Z > 0£ Itsd 

U^i^-t£)jSL»-La_^ ) j)^ =^ r jij\ \_^ 4j^\ (0) 

\ 9 (^) A^==>jP^ Laj 

5J»\ J^lljj 4jil Ojl ££ 

£^>4^*52/* 



^ ^ r> ^ 




o *l^\i^l^==^j4Uj4li\ IL^cX^Uj^JS V^j 


£il3«yj4 ®) O people, the Being that has those divine attrib¬ 

utes is your Lord. You have no lord besides Him, 
and there is no one worthy of worship besides Him. 
He is the Creator of everything, so worship Him 
alone as He is the only one deserving of worship. 
He takes care of everything. 

HI Vision cannot encompass Him, but His Vision 
covers and encompasses all things. He is the One 
Who is Subtle with His righteous servants and is 
Aware of them. 

{j| Clear proofs from your Lord have come to you, 
0 * ^ gs ^ P eo P^ e - Whoever understands them and is mind- 
]yyC\j 2 ^ fill, the benefit of that will return to him. Whoever 
is blind to them and unmindful, it will only be to his 
loss. It is not my duty to watch over you and record 
your actions: I am only a messenger from my Lord. 
He is the One Who watches over you. 

(Jfl Just as I explained the various types of proofs 
of My Power, I also explain the various types of 
ayahs containing promises, threats and advice. And 
so the idolaters will say: This is not revelation: it 
is merely something you learnt from the People of 
the Scripture before you. And I did this in order to 
explain the truth to the believers of the nation of 
Muhammad (peace be upon them ), as they are the 
ones who accept the truth and follow it. 

(j|| Follow, O Messenger, the truth that your Lord 
reveals to you. There is no one worthy of worship 
besides Him, may He be glorified. Let your heart 
not be concerned with the disbelievers and their 
stubbornness, as their matter is left to Allah. 

@ If Allah willed for them not to associate any one 
as partner with Him, they would not have done so. I 
have not made you, O Messenger, a guardian to record their actions, nor are you in charge of them. You are only a mes¬ 
senger and your duty is only to convey the message. 

@) O believers, do not insult the idols that they worship alongside Allah, even though they be deserving of that, for then 
the idolaters due to ignorance would insult Allah unknowingly, may He be glorified. Just as He made their misguidance 
fair seeming to them, He makes the behaviour of every nation, be it good or bad, seem good to them and so they act 
accordingly. Then their return on the Day of Rising is to their Lord, Who will inform them about what they used to do in 
the world and repay their actions. 

{j| The idolaters swear by Allah, with their strongest oaths, that if Muhammad (peace be upon him) brings them one of 
the signs they asked for, then they will believe. Say to them, O Messenger: I do not have signs so that I may bring them: 
they are only with Allah, Who sends them down as He wills. 

And what will inform you, O believers, that if these signs come, as they request, they still will not believe? Instead, they 
will persist in their denial and stubbornness, because they in fact do not want to be guided. 

ff| And I will turn their hearts and vision, by intervening between them and preventing their guidance to the truth, just as 
I intervened between them and faith in the Qur’an the first time because of their stubbornness. I will leave them in their 
misguidance and rebellion against their Lord, confused and wandering. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Allah is exalted from the injustice that the belief of fatalism (jabr) entails. The verses explain that those who disbelieve 
or associate partners with Allah do so out of free choice. 2. It is not within the capacity of any prophet to bring a sign 
(miracle) by himself, or whenever he wishes. Instead, this is a matter that rests with Allah. He alone has the ability to do 
this. He is Wise and determines the type of miracle and the time of its appearance. 3. Insulting the Allahs of the idolaters 
is prohibited for fear of the greater evil that this may lead to, namely their responding by throwing insults at the Lord 
of all people. 4. Sometimes Allah intervenes between a servant and guidance, and turns his sight and heart away from 
obedience, as a punishment for his choosing disbelief. 

























jj ' ojj^ 

it 


oi&yaj 1 


(3^ viiV-^===3j (^) 0^4^- 



@ If I had responded to them by bringing what they 
requested - by sending down the angels for them 
to see, and made the dead speak to them about the 
truth of what you brought, and gathered everything 
they asked for before their eyes - they still would 
not have believed in what you brought, unless Al¬ 
lah willed for them to be guided. However, most of 
them are ignorant of this and do not turn to Allah to 
grant them guidance. 

UJ Just as I tested you with the hostility of these 
idolaters towards you, I tested every prophet before 
you. I made for each of them enemies of rebellious 
men and jinn, who used to whisper evil in the hearts 
of one another, beautifying falsehood in order to 
deceive them. If I willed them not to do so, they 
would not have done that; but I willed it as a test 
for them. So leave them to their fabrications of dis- A 
belief and falsehood, and pay no attention to them. 

@ This is so that the hearts of those who do not 
accept the Afterlife may incline towards what they 
whisper to one another, happily accepting such 
things for themselves, and that they persist in com¬ 
mitting the sins and wrongs they were doing. 

(jf| Say, O Messenger, to these idolaters who wor¬ 
ship others together with Allah: Does it make 
sense for me to accept anyone other than Allah as 
a judge between us whilst Allah is the One Who 
has revealed the Qur’an which sufficiently explains 
everything. 

The Jews, to whom I gave the Torah, and the Chris¬ 
tians, to whom I gave the Gospel, know that the 
Qur’an has been revealed to you, because the proof 
of that is found in their scriptures. So do not be of 
those who doubt about what I revealed to you. 

(jf| The word of your Lord - namely the Qur’an - is complete in the truthfulness of its statements and the justice of its in¬ 
structions and prohibitions. There is no one who can alter His words. He is the One Who hears and knows the statements 
of His servants. Nothing is hidden from him and He will repay their actions. 

@ If you, O Messenger, supposedly followed most of the people on earth, they would mislead you from Allah’s religion. 
Allah’s custom has always been that the truth is with the minority. Most people follow nothing but speculation that has 
no basis and they think that those whom they worship will bring them close to Allah, whereas they are completely wrong 
in believing this. 

@ Your Lord, O Messenger, knows best those people who are misled from His path; and He knows best those who are 
rightly guided to it. Nothing of that is hidden from Him. 


■ 

JJA.P 

\j*JJL-kj 

( JiX3\ \aJL* 

\\ lS A \ j^\^^=====is>- 
1 j' oiAAj 

<1 cAj Ij&A ^ 


Al-An‘am 


142 


IJ) Eat, O people, from that which was slaughtered while using Allah’s name, if you truly accept His clear proofs. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The main goal of a servant is to follow the truth, to look for it in the ways that Allah has explained, to practise on it, to 
hope for the Lord’s assistance in following it and not to rely on one’s self, strength or ability. 

2. In fairness to the knowledgeable believing minority the Qur’an attributes ignorance and misguidance to the majority 
of creation. 

3. One of Allah’s practices amongst the creation is the existence of enemies, from amongst humans and the jinn, for the 
prophets and their followers because truth is recognised through falsehood which is its opposite. 

4. The Qur’an is truthful in its narrations and just in its laws. Nothing contrary to reality will be found in its narrations 
and nothing contrary to the truth will be found in its laws. 





















Vj-“ 


\ ir 




S&J a$jLZ:V^==>3 \ 

O^L^So <juJ\ oItaSLIjj 

AJS-> \ y li==3 \jL) C^^yLlZj j 
0^3^ ^ ok5 **^3 4J^(jL<l\j 

l)& j^==^ \ <&[ I 


(jp What is it that prevents you, O believers, from 
eating that which was slaughtered in Allah’s name, 
when Allah has made clear what is unlawful for 
you. It is therefore necessary for you to leave that 
which is forbidden, unless you are forced by neces¬ 
sity to eat it, in which case it will be lawful. 

Many of the misguided idolaters mislead their fol¬ 
lowers with their incorrect views. They consider 
lawful that which Allah has made unlawful (such as 
carrion), and they consider unlawful that which Al¬ 
lah has made lawful (such as the bahlrah, wasllah, 
harm, etc.). 

Your Lord, O Messenger, knows best those who 
overstep His limits and He will repay them for their 
transgression. 

(j§| O people, avoid committing sins openly or in 
secret. Those who commit sins, secret or open, will 
be repaid by Allah for what they did. 

{§J O Muslims, do not eat that which was not 
slaughtered in the name of Allah, whether the name 
of someone other than Allah was mentioned over 
it or not. Eating such forbidden food is to abandon 
obedience to Allah in favour of disobedience. 

The satans whisper to their friends, inspiring them 
with doubts, so that they argue with you about eat¬ 
ing carrion. If you, O Muslims, were to follow them 
in the doubts they present for the lawfulness of car¬ 
rion, then you would be equal to them in associat¬ 
ing partners with Allah. 

(j§| Is the one who was dead prior to receiving Al¬ 
lah’s guidance - due to his disbelief, ignorance and 
sins, and then He gave him life by guiding him to 
faith, knowledge and obedience - equal to the one 
who cannot leave the darkness of disbelief, ignorance and sins, and to whom the paths have become unclear and dark? 
Just as polytheism, the consumption of carrion, and false arguments were made fair seeming to these idolaters, the sins 
of the disbelievers were made to seem good to them, so that they are repaid for them on the Day of Rising with a painful 
punishment. 

(jjS) Just as what transpired with those leaders of Mecca who committed polytheism and barred others from the Way of 
Allah, He has placed leaders and influential people in every town who use various means and schemes to call towards the 
path of Satan and oppose the messengers and their followers. In reality, their scheming and planning will eventually only 
harm them, but they do realise this due to their ignorance and their following of desires. 

{§| And when there comes to any of these leaders a verse or a sign which Allah reveals to His Prophet proving his truth¬ 
fulness, they say: We will never accept this until Allah bestows upon us the Prophethood as He did to those Prophets 
aforetime. 

Allah refutes them by saying that He knows best who is most suitable to be appointed to carry out the duties of the 
mission and He only selects the finest people for prophethood and messengership. These transgressors will be afflicted 
with disgrace and humiliation because of their arrogance against the truth, and with a severe punishment because of their 
scheming. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The default with respect to all things including food is permissibility. If the Sacred Law has not declared something 
unlawful it remains permissible. 

2. Any person who says something about religion without knowledge or calls people to something about which he does 
not know whether it is true or false, is a transgressor who is wronging himself and wronging others by misguiding them. 
The same applies to a person who issues a religious verdict without being qualified to do so. 

3. The servant must leave all wrong that will place him in sin and difficulty, whether this relates to Allah’s rights of the 
rights of Allah’s servants. 

4. The benefit of a believer is not restricted to himself, but extends to other people as well. 


5 \- 0 \ 




















llS l^-=a tj>£jl^~ \ju^&j lj XS^ i^\ \j\ j 

jy-j .jl\ \ 4J^ ^xJft^i j 

J UlL^aS jStL.. a'Luli SojJ&y^\ XJ*j(fc) 

JX; ^4^ -0 


=>Jo 


t&z&' 
©3>j5U53 


<*m 





S\ uittitiSM 



(jp Whomever Allah wishes to guide to the right 
path, He opens their heart to Islam so they accept it 
willingly. Whomever He wishes to abandon and not 
guide. He makes their chest extremely narrow and 
unable to accept the truth, such that they become 
like a person climbing into the higher layers of the 
atmosphere while finding it increasingly difficult to 
breathe. Just as Allah made this extreme narrow¬ 
ness the condition of the person who goes astray, 

He will place the punishment on those who do not 
have faith in Him. 

HI This religion that I have given you, O Messen¬ 
ger, is My straight path, in which there is no crook¬ 
edness. I have made the ayahs clear for the one who 
has understanding. 

(jf| Such people will be awarded Paradise on the 
Day of Judgement, in which they will be safe from 
every type of harm and discomfort. Allah will be 
their Friend, Protector, Supporter and Guardian. 

This will be their reward for the good actions they 
used to do. 

(S§| Remember, O Messenger, the day when Allah 
will gather both the jinn and humankind. He will 
address the jinn and tell them that they had misled 
many people and prevented them from Allah’s path. 

Their followers among humankind will say in re¬ 
sponse to their Lord: O our Lord, we benefited from 
one another: the jinn benefited by having human 
beings follow them; and the human beings benefit¬ 
ed by using the jinn to obtain their desires. And now 
we have reached the term that You have appointed 
for us and this is now the Day of Rising. 

Allah will tell them that the fire of Hell will be their 
home, where they will live eternally, with the exception of those sinful monotheists whom Allah wills to remove from 
it. Your Lord, O Messenger, is Wise in His planning and handling of matters; He knows which of His servants deserves 
the punishment. 

(jH Just as I gave some of the rebellious jinn the ability to mislead some people, I will give an authority and power to every 
evil sinner so that they may influence other sinners-prompting them to do evil and create a dislike in their hearts and turn 
them away from good. This is a just recompense for the sins they used to commit. 

(j|| On the Day of Rising, I will address jinn and humankind, and ask them if messengers from their own species had not 
come to them reciting to them what Allah had revealed to them and warning them that they will meet this day, which 
is the Day of Rising. They will say: Of course they did. Today we confess against ourselves that Your messengers did 
communicate Your message to us and we admit the meeting of this day; but we had rejected Your messengers and denied 
the meeting of this day. 

The life of the world with its temporary beauty, decorations and luxuries had deceived them, and they will admit against 
themselves that they disbelieved in Allah and His messengers in the world. Yet this confession and acceptance will not be 
of any use to them, as the time for its usefulness would have already passed. 

^ Beneficial Points: 

1. Allah’s system with respect to misguidance and guidance is that both of these come from Him and are created and 
brought into existence by Him. They occur by the action of the servant by his choice after Allah’s will. 

2. Allah’s friendship and protection towards the believers is in accordance to their good actions. The more good actions 
they do the greater is Allah’s friendship towards them. 

3. Allah’s custom is to give authority to one wrongdoer over another, so that they urge and encourage one another towards 
evil and to create a dislike and aversion in his heart for good. 




0<J^=‘ 


Al-An‘am 


























1 «£!}'•> 

0 AJSJ) j o^ ^=»L^\ U^= illS 



|| ($) 5^i\ /4rp\ l^s 

51^== Li3 

UJ 4^\ <J>LJ^-^*^ 


(jp The reason for sending messengers to mankind 
and jinn is so that no one is punished for the crimes 
they committed without a messenger having been 
sent to warn them and the invitation reaching them. 
I only punished a nation after sending messengers 
to them. 

(jf| Each one of them will have ranks in accordance 
to their actions. The person who did a great deal of 
evil will not be equal to the one who did less. The 
followers will not be equal to those who were fol¬ 
lowed. Similarly, the reward for those who do good 
will not be the same. Your Lord is not unaware of 
what they used to do. Instead, He is well aware of 
that. Nothing of it is hidden from Him and He will 
repay them for their actions. 

(jf| Your Lord, O Messenger, is Self-sufficient of 
His servants. He is not in need of them or their wor¬ 
ship of Him. Their disbelief in Him does not harm 
Him. Despite His not being in need of them, He 
is Merciful towards them.If He wished to destroy 
you, O disobedient servants. He would destroy you 
with His punishment, and then after this He would 
bring others who would have faith in Him and obey 
Him, just as He created you from the progeny of 
other people who had come before you. 

HI The resurrection, rising, reckoning and pun¬ 
ishment that you are promised, O disbelievers, 
will most certainly happen. You will not be able to 
escape from your Lord by running away: He will 
seize and punish you. 

D Say, O Messenger: O my people, remain on your 
path of disbelief and misguidance if you choose, as 
I have fulfilled my obligation having established 
the evidence against you by communicating the message to you. I am therefore not concerned about your disbelief and 
misguidance. Instead, I will remain firm on the path of truth that I follow. Soon you will come to know who will be victo¬ 
rious in the world and inherit the earth, and who will receive the home of the Afterlife. The idolaters will not succeed, nei¬ 
ther in this world nor the Afterlife. Their end result will be loss even though they may have some enjoyment in the world. 
HI The idolaters made innovations and false claims in their religion concerning Allah by assigning to Him a share of the 
crops and livestock that He created, and giving a share of what He created to their idols. Yet the share they gave to their 
partners does not reach the avenues that Allah requires them to be spent in, such as on the poor and destitute. But what 
they gave to Allah reaches the idols and is spent on them. How evil is their judgement and distribution! 

(jp Just as Satan made this unfair judgement fair seeming to the idolaters, the devils -who were their partners and associ¬ 
ates - made it seem good to them that they should kill their children out of the fear of poverty. The devils inspired them 
with this in order to destroy them by their committing the act of murder, which Allah had made unlawful, and to make 
their religion confusing for them such that they did not know anymore what Allah had commanded or prohibited for them. 
If Allah had willed for them not to do this, they would not have done so. However, He willed it out of His wisdom. So 
leave, O Messenger, these idolaters and their fabrications about Allah, because that will not harm you, and entrust their 
matter to Allah. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The various levels of the creation with respect to acts of sin and obedience requires that their ranks with respect to the 
levels of punishment and reward also be different. 

2. Allah rightly condemned the idolaters because of seven characteristics that they possessed: loss, foolishness, igno¬ 
rance, making unlawful what Allah provided, fabricating against Allah, misguidance and not following the right path. 




















il 

_jji\ j 



oXl& j \y&> <^\ja \^\S^(\ft) | 

<Ljs {jk=^i cA3 i&^S-AAj ^jj^====>A 



(jp The idolaters said that certain animals and crops 
were banned, and only those whom they wish may 
eat of them, such as those who worship the idols 
and others, according to their claim and fabrication. 

They also said that the backs of certain animals 
were forbidden and that no one could ride or carry 
a load on those animals. Then they claimed that the 
name of Allah must not be mentioned over certain 
animals at the time of slaughter and the names of 
idols must be taken instead. They falsely attributed 
all of this to Allah. Allah will repay them with His 
punishment because of what they made up about 
Him. 

|I| They said: The foetus in the wombs of these re¬ 
served animals, if born alive, is permitted for our 
males and forbidden to our women. If it is stillborn, 
then the males and females will share in it. 

Allah will justly repay them for this statement. He 
is Wise in His sacred laws and in handling the af¬ 
fairs of His creation, and He knows full well about 
them. 

HI Those who killed their children due to their 
foolishness and ignorance, and made unlawful the 
animals that Allah provided for them, falsely attrib¬ 
uting this to Allah, are ruined. They have strayed 
from the straight path and are not guided to it. 

@) Allah, may He be glorified, is the One Who cre¬ 
ated gardens raised above the ground by means of 
stems and trellises, and spread out gardens on the 
surface of the earth without any stems, He is the 
One Who created the date palm. He produced crops 
which differ in their shape and taste. He is the One 
Who created the olive and the pomegranate, the 
leaves of which are similar but their fruit is different. Eat, O people, from its fruit when it bears fruit and pay its Zakat on 
the day of its harvest. Do not overstep the limits of the sacred law with respect to eating and spending, because Allah does 
not love those who overstep His limits in this and other respects. Rather, He hates such people. The One Who created all 
of this is the One Who has made it lawful for His servants. Therefore, the idolaters have no right to declare it unlawful. 
HI He is the One Who produced for you some animals suitable for carrying loads (such as big camels) and other animals 
not suitable for that purpose (such as small camels, goats and sheep). 

Eat, O people, of the permissible things that Allah has provided for you and do not follow the footsteps of Satan by con¬ 
sidering as lawful what Allah has forbidden and making unlawful what Allah has permitted, as the idolaters do. O people, 
O people, Satan is your clear enemy as He wants you to oppose Allah by doing so. 

Beneficial Points: 

1. Ones own desires are the cause for making unlawful what Allah has permitted and considering as lawful what Allah 
has forbidden. 

2. Zakat is due on crops and fruit when they are harvested. It is permissible to eat of them before paying the Zakat and 
this will not be included in the Zakat. 

3. It is allowed to enjoy pure things without wastage and without overstepping the limits with respect to eating and 
spending. 

4. Satan is man’s enemy and he must not be followed in his instructions and prohibitions. 


^ ^ ^ ^ jl ^ ^ ^ 


Slj iAjA===*J>JJ \jl*\jA====> ^ 






















cjA-X3^_^—\ A ^r c 

4j^cA^^\ \j*\ oOjN V4 0^>^==^Ai V* JS 





0^3 o\ 2 \j li_i]^ p_C;Utf> (jp "12 li, 

Li-yi-^^V>a,aj\ 

^ISXJ \jLla 

IjUjis^^lUto v <^( J^5 5^ 


. t > 



© He created for you eight types: two types of 
sheep, male and female, and two types of goats. 
Say, O Messenger, to the idolaters: Did Allah make 
the two males unlawful because of their being 
male? If they say, ‘Yes,’ then ask them: Why do you 
regard the females as unlawful? Or did He make 
the two females unlawful because of their being 
female? If they say, ‘Yes,’ then ask them: Why do 
you regard the males as unlawful? Or did He make 
what the wombs of the two females contain unlaw¬ 
ful because of being contained in the womb? If they 
say, ‘Yes,’ then ask them: Why do you differentiate 
between what the wombs contain by making the 
male unlawful sometimes and making the female 
unlawful at other times? Tell me, O idolaters, what 
, y,*- ^ ^ "> 'ZT'Zk^ 9 proper knowledge do you base this on, if you are 

•\ ^ ^ truthful in your claim that the prohibition for this 

^ ^ y is from Allah? 

© The remainder of the eight types are a pair of 
camels and a pair of cattle. Say, O Messenger, to the 
idolaters: Did Allah make any of them unlawful due 
to their being male or female or due to being con¬ 
tained in the womb? Were you, O idolaters, present 
when Allah gave the instruction for the prohibition 
of the animals that you regard as unlawful, accord¬ 
ing to your claim? 

There is no greater wrong and offence than a per¬ 
son who makes up lies about Allah, by attributing 
to Him the prohibition of that which He has not pro¬ 
hibited, in order to mislead people from the straight 
path without any basis. Allah does not guide to the 
right path those who do wrong by making up lies 
about Allah. 

© Say, O Messenger: I do not find in what Allah has revealed to me anything forbidden except that which dies without 
being properly slaughtered, blood that is flowing, the meat of a pig - for that is impure and unlawful - or that which is 
slaughtered in the name of other than Allah (such as animals slaughtered in the name of idols). Whoever is forced by ne¬ 
cessity to eat of these forbidden things due to extreme hunger, without looking for enjoyment by eating them and without 
exceeding the limit of necessity, there will be no sin on him in that. Your Lord, O Messenger, is Forgiving towards the 
person who is compelled to eat from that and is Compassionate towards such a person. 

After Allah mentioned what He made unlawful for the nation, in the following verse He mentions what He had made 
unlawful for the Jews, to show that what the idolaters have declared unlawful is not based on anything that came from 
Allah and that they are merely following the dictates of Satan: 

© I made unlawful for the Jews animals whose toes were not separated (such as camels and ostriches). I also made un¬ 
lawful for them the fat of cattle and sheep, except for what was attached to their backs or on their intestines or what was 
mixed with bone (such as the rump or flank). I repaid them for their disobedience by making these things unlawful for 
them. I am truthful in all that I relate. 

Beneficial Points: 

1. The verses indicate to the validity of debate with respect to matters of knowledge and the validity of the use of reason¬ 
ing and analogical deduction. 

2. Revelation and what is inferred from it is the method to recognise the lawful and the unlawful. 

3. It is wrong for a person to issue a verdict with respect to a religious matter unless he is reasonably sure that the verdict 
he issues is correct and will please Allah. 

4. It is the mercy of Allah towards His servants that He permits them to consume things which are forbidden at the time 
of necessity. 

5. All forbidden things are dirty and impure, and they are of the filthy things which Allah has made unlawful for His 
servants in order to protect and honour them. 

6. One of the objectives of the sacred laws is to take into consideration religious and worldly interests and to guard the 
interests of the individual and that of society. 


1 0 j 























| ^ \)j£* j 

\ 1 A 


| 



*«-Sjj ^^==jjr^\ ^LijS 

^ 2 ° ^ '■'' ___- _ 'C/' 

\LjZy\y\^ X£=>Jltyl6 

fj>)J45 c$ 3 {’A^& £e&$ 
<j*Si)\ y=yy\ 4 j^s js i jjS\ b\j 13^ 

u^:\^i jU J($)^id |Cbi^ &* jg 
ooji^S *yjl 

; sS^\^L>P33 



@ If they deny you, O Messenger, and do not ac¬ 
cept what you brought from your Lord, then say to 
them in encouragement: Your Lord is One, posses¬ 
sor of vast mercy. It is because of His mercy that 
He has given you relief and has not yet taken you to 
task by punishing you. Also say to them as a warn¬ 
ing: His punishment is not averted from those who 
commit sins. 

HI The idolaters will say, using Allah’s will and 
decree as proof for their associating partners with 
Him: If Allah had willed that neither we nor our 
ancestors associate any partners with Him we 
would not have done so; and if He had willed that 
we do not make anything unlawful for ourselves we 
would not have done so. 

Those before them also denied their messengers 
with similar worthless proofs saying: If Allah had 
willed that we do not prohibit them, we would not 
have done so. 

So they persisted in their denial until they tasted 
My punishment that I sent down on them. Say, O 
Messenger, to these idolaters: Do you have any 
evidence that indicates that Allah is pleased that 
you associate others with Him, and that you make 
lawful what He has prohibited, and make unlawful 
what He has allowed? Just because you did these 
actions does not mean that He is pleased with them. 

You are following nothing but speculation with 
respect to this and speculation holds no weight 
against the truth. You are only lying. 

@ Say, O Messenger, to the idolaters: If you only 
have these weak arguments, then Allah has a deci¬ 
sive argument against which the excuses you pres¬ 
ent hold no weight and before which the doubts that you cling to will disappear. If Allah had willed to guide all of you to 
the truth, O idolaters. He would have done so. 

HI Say, O Messenger, to these idolaters who make unlawful what Allah has allowed and who claim that it is Allah who 
has made it unlawful: Bring your witnesses to testify that Allah has made these things unlawful. If they testify without 
any knowledge that Allah has made these things unlawful, then do not believe their testimony, O Messenger, because it 
is false testimony. Do not follow the desires of those who let their desires rule over them. They denied His verses when 
they made unlawful what Allah had allowed. Do not follow those who do not have faith in the Afterlife and who associate 
others with their Lord. How can a person who deals with his Lord in this way be followed? 

(jfj Say, O Messenger, to the people: Come! I will read to you what Allah has made unlawful. He has made it unlawful 
that you associate any creation as partner to Him; that you disobey your parents - for it is your duty to be good to them; 
that you kill your children due to poverty - as the people during the period of ignorance used to do -1 provide for you and 
for them. He has also made it unlawful that you go near immoral acts, whether they are done openly or in secret; and that 
you kill the soul that Allah has prohibited you from killing, unless it is done rightfully (such as in the case of adultery and 
apostasy). He has instructed you with what was mentioned so that you understand Allah’s instructions and prohibitions. 
® Beneficial Points: 

1. The verses contain a warning against offences that lead to Allah’s punishment because Allah’s punishment, when He 
wills it, will not be averted from those who are guilty. 

2. An argument must be based on knowledge and proof. If it based merely on speculation that holds no weight against 
the truth it is not valid. 

3. Using the Divine decree as an argument for disobedience after Allah has given mankind free will is clearly wrong and 
based on stubbornness. 

4. The verses indicate that a servant will carry out Allah’s instructions in proportion to his or her understanding. 

5. The prohibition of going near immoral acts is more profound than the prohibition of committing them because it in¬ 
cludes a prohibition of those things that lead to those acts as well. 


j j I 




















' DjjZl 






£. 


|j| He has prohibited you from becoming involved 
with the wealth of orphans - those who lose their 
father before maturity - until they became mature 
and are considered to be sensible, unless you do so 
in a manner that brings benefit and an increase in 
that wealth. 

He has also prohibited you from giving short meas¬ 
ure or weight; rather, it is necessary that you are 
fair and just when taking or giving anything in a 
purchase and sale transaction. He does not burden a 
soul more than it can bear, and you will not be taken 
to task for any increase or decrease in measure that 
is unintentional. 

He has, likewise, prohibited you from saying that 
which is false when relating an incident or giving 
testimony, displaying unfair preference to a relative 
or friend. 

He has, too, prohibited you from breaking Allah’s 
pledge. If you make a pledge with Allah or in Al¬ 
lah’s name, then such pacts must be fulfilled. Allah 
has instructed you with the above in the hope that 
you would ponder over the outcomes of your ac¬ 
tions. 

(Jfl He has prohibited you from following the paths 
of misguidance. You are required to follow Allah’s 
straight path, in which there is no crookedness. 
The paths of misguidance will lead you far away 
from the path of truth. Allah instructs you to follow 
the straight path in the hope that you will become 
mindful of Him by fulfilling His instructions and 
staying away from His prohibitions. 

HI After all this, I relate to you that I gave the Torah 
to Moses as a completion of My favour and a re¬ 
ward for his good actions, to make everything required in religion clear, and as a mercy in the hope that they would have 
faith in the meeting with their Lord on the Day of Judgement and prepare for it with good actions. 

HI And this Qur’an is a book that I have revealed and is full of blessings because of the religious and worldly benefits it 
contains. So follow what is revealed in it, and be mindful of going against it, in the hope that you will be shown mercy. 

This Book was revealed so that you, idolaters, do not say: Allah only revealed the Torah and the Gospel to the Jews 
and the Christians before us and He did not reveal any scripture to us. I do not know how to read their scriptures as they 
are in their language and not in ours. 

|f| Likewise, I sent this Book so that you do not say: If Allah had revealed a scripture to us, just as He did to the Jews and 
Christians, we would have been more upright than them. 

So now has Allah revealed the Book to your prophet, Muhammad (peace be upon him), in your language: a clear proof, 
guidance, and a mercy for the entire nation. Then do not offer false excuses and give invalid reasons for rejecting it. 
Surely the greatest wrongdoer is the person who denies Allah’s ayahs and turns away from them. Allah will punish those 
who turn away from His words with a severe punishment, by causing them to enter the fire of Hell as a repayment for 
their turning away from and ignoring them. 

Beneficial Points: 

1. It is not permissible to transact in the wealth of orphans except within the limits of their best interests. Their wealth will 
only be given to them once they reach the age of discernment. 

2. All orders of the sacred law, out of Allah’s Mercy, are only charged according to ones ability. 

3. Judges are required to be fair between disputants. 

4. It is Allah’s responsibility to provide sustenance for His creatures. 

5. The paths of misguidance are many but it is only Allah’s path that leads to salvation. 

6. False excuses and weak arguments will never be of benefit to those who make use of them. 


j* 

lS -^J 

\ ]y^]j j 

&L iffikJk j/v\3j UA5j\0 

^ ^ is. _, _ _ ^ ___ 






















Those who deny the truth are not waiting for Srasffcj 0 » r^\VX\ 

anything but for the angel of death and his assis¬ 
tants to come to them in order to take away their 
souls in the world; or for their Lord to come on the 
Day of Decision in the Afterlife, O Messenger, in 
order to make the final decision about them; or for 
some of the Lord’s signs that indicate the approach 
of the Final Hour, to come. On the day when some 
of your Lord’s signs come - such as the rising of the 
sun in the West - the faith of a disbeliever will not 
be of any benefit to him, nor will the good action 
of a believer who did not do good previously be of 
benefit to him. Say, O Messenger, to these idolaters 
who deny this, ‘Wait for one of these things; I am 
also waiting’. 

(j§| O Messenger, have nothing to do with those 
Jews and Christians who divided their religion, by 
taking part of it and leaving out another part, and 
turned into various sects. You are innocent of the 
misguidance that they adopt. Your duty is only to 
warn them. Their matter is entrusted to Allah and 
then, on the Day of Judgement, He will tell them 
about what they used to do in the world and repay 
them for that. 

HI Whoever of the believers brings a good action 
on the Day of Judgement, Allah will multiply it for 
them ten times. Whoever brings an evil action will 
only be punished with its equivalent amount, and 
not more than that. On the Day of Judgement, they 
will not be wronged by a reduction in the reward of 
good actions, nor by an increase in the punishment 
for evil actions. 

|f| Say, O Messenger, to these idolaters who are in 
denial: My Lord has guided me to a straight path, which is the path of the religion that maintains the interests of this world 
and the Afterlife. It is the faith of Abraham who inclined to the truth and who was never one of those who associated 
others with Allah. 

(jf| Say, O Messenger: My prayer and sacrifice is for Allah and in His name, not for anyone else. My life and death is only 
for Allah, the Lord of all creation, and no one else has any share in that from me. 

HI He, may He be glorified, has no partner. There is no one else worthy of worship besides Him. Allah has instructed me 
to accept this pure monotheism and I am the first of those who acknowledge Him in this nation. 

HI Say, O Messenger, to these idolaters: Shall I search for someone other than Allah as a Lord when He, may He be glo¬ 
rified, is the Lord of everything? He is the Lord of those things that you worship besides Him. No innocent person will 
bear the sin of another. Then your return will be to your Lord alone on the Day of Judgement, and He will inform you 
about religious matters that you used to differ about when you were in the world. 

(jp Allah is the One Who made you successors of those whom came before you on earth, so that you inhabit it after 
them. He has raised some of you in rank over others - in terms of physical form, livelihood and other aspects - in order 
to test you through what He has given you. Your Lord, O Messenger, is quick in delivering justice, since anything that 
is approaching is close. And He is also Forgiving and Compassionate towards those of His servants who repent to Him. 

Beneficial Points: 

1. Religion demands unity and solidarity, and prohibits disunity and division. 

2. Procrastination in doing good deeds is not permissible as the time for doing good may suddenly end by death or by the 
appearance of the major signs of the Day of Rising. 

3. Allah’s perfect justice and kindness is that He repays an evil deed with its like and a good deed with ten times its like, 
which is the minimum that it may be multiplied. 

4. The true and proper religion requires that all religious activities must be performed for Allah. The servant must turn 
only to Him in his prayer, worship, rites, sacrifices and all acts of good in his life, as well as the bequests he makes to be 
carried out after his death. 


^ % & 

\^j>\ <3 ^44 

45 

lK45 4 0 

] 54^4 544 AjIj 4-5 <51^4^ 


Al-An‘am 














The Heights (Surah Al-A‘raf) 


J> ' V)y* 


\o\ 




zmm 


i^i 



m 


ojj^^Xs \j* NUi 2Ajj3 od 

>-Aj\ ^>t q>L^i ^-=sV^\ 

V5^ oV^====*\^ (^)o jVj\S 

1 lV-^ 5^ oi-^ {^j 


H. 


jL& jyy* cJju 3>d\ 

'3j0v 



® Themes of the Surah: 

The surah elaborates on the struggle between faith 
and disbelief, and the consequences of the conflict, 
and how the prophets behaved with their people in 
such cases. 

® Explanation: 

© This surah begins with the disconnected letters, 
the explanation for which has already preceded in 
Surah Baqarah. 

© The noble Qur’an is a scripture revealed by Al¬ 
lah to you, O Prophet, so do not let there be any 
distress or doubt in your heart about it. He revealed 
it to you to warn people by it and to be a proof, and 
to remind those who have faith through it, because 
it is they who benefit from being reminded. 

© Follow, O people, the Scripture which your Lord 
revealed to you, and the traditions of your Prophet. 
Do not follow the desires of those you imagine to 
be friends and protectors amongst the devils or evil 
scholars, turning to them and leaving what was re¬ 
vealed to you because of your desires. How little 
you remember! If you had remembered, you would 
y not have preferred falsehood over the truth, and you 
|j|* would have followed what your Messenger came 
with, acting in obedience to it and leaving anything 
besides it. 

© How many cities Allah has destroyed through 
His punishment because they persisted in their dis- 
gj* belief and error! Allah sent His punishment down 
on them in their obliviousness at night or during 
the day: they could not do anything to avoid the 
punishment, and their false Allahs could do nothing to protect them from it. 

© All they could do when the punishment came down on them was to admit that they had done wrong through their 
disbelief in Allah. 

© Allah will certainly question the communities He sent messengers to on the Day of Judgement: about how they 
received the messengers. Also, He will certainly question the messengers about whether they delivered what they were 
instructed to deliver, and how their communities responded to it. 

© Allah will inform everyone about what they did in the world, through His knowledge, because He was always aware 
of whatever they did. Nothing is hidden from Him, and He was never, at any point, absent from them. 

© The weighing of what they did on the Day of Judgement will be with justice, with no one being wronged in the least. 
Those whose good actions weigh more than their bad actions have succeeded in reaching the goal and being saved from 
what they feared. © Those whose bad actions weigh more than their good actions are the people who have lost them¬ 
selves, gaining their destruction on the Day of Judgement and being excluded from eternal bliss because of their rejection 
of Allah’s signs and verses. © Allah certainly established you, O children of Adam, on the earth, and gave you the means 
of making a living. You should be thankful to Allah for that, but you give little thanks. 

@ O people, Allah created your father Adam, making him in the best of forms and the best of designs. Then He com¬ 
manded the angels to bow down to him, honouring him, so they did so, all bowing down, except for Iblls, the Satan, who 
refused to bow down out of pride and stubbornness. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. One of the aims of the revelation of the Qur’an is to warn the disbelievers and proud ones, as well as to serve as a 
beneficial reminder for the believers. 2. Allah revealed the Qur’an to the believers so that they would follow it and act 
according to it. If they do this the formation of their good character will be perfected, and the blessing upon them will be 
complete, and they will be guided to the best of deeds and good character. 3. The weighing of the deeds of people on the 
day of Judgement will be with justice and fairness, without any injustice or wronging anyone. 

4. Allah made the earth for humanity so that they could benefit from it, build on it, cultivate it and extract what was in it 
for their benefit. 


1 0 




























\oy 


*003^ 


jjvL^-J ^j^\t^k>\ il\S( ffi f V>i<i£\ ^V>-^W^ 

| > 4 ^ l ) X-*3^1 ^-tj^ | 


3^(w) S^li piy^=>\ i^SjjUAjui Z&3 

2i^-\ S^-JJJ <S^ ^li\^'S\25j (j£) CjJZ&?\ 
L yj^r^ \y>zJ^ \ 6 j^W^gJ^ 9 I^TjL^J 

J \ijW gj^> Q^Ia-4^ c^J^VaV^^ l$ -j3) ^yl?^ ^ \ 
0^==^3ua\^O £)\ 

(^) cf^zsjA^ L^i (3 ^Va ^ ^.^\Sj (^ 

J&jXQa lijJo^lX^&glAv^; 

^ 0 Qi3jj£tl^=^6| 


@ Allah asked Satan rebuking him: ‘What stopped 
you from following My command to bow down to 
Adam?’ Satan said: ‘What prevented me is that I 
am better than Adam: You created me from fire and 
Adam from mud, and fire is greater then mud.’ 

@ Allah told Satan: ‘Go down from Paradise, 
because it is not appropriate for you to be proud 
in it; as it is a place for those who are good and 
pure-hearted. You are O Satan disgraced and hu¬ 
miliated, even though you consider yourself to be 
superior to Adam. 

@ Satan asked Allah: ‘O my Lord, give me relief 
until the Day of Rising, so that I could tempt and 
misguide whomever of the children of Adam I am 
able to tempt.’ 

@ Allah told Satan: ‘You are O Satan given respite 
till the first blast of the trumpet when all created 
beings die, and the Creator alone remains.’. 

@ Satan said: ‘Because You have made me fall into 
error through not following Your command to bow 
down to Adam, I will surely sit in wait for the chil¬ 
dren of Adam upon Your straight path, to turn them 
away and mislead them from it, just as I was misled 
through not bowing down to Adam.’ 

@ ‘I will surely come to them from every direc¬ 
tion, causing them to neglect the Afterlife, and de¬ 
sire the life of this world, giving them doubts, and 
making their low desires seem beautiful to them. 

And You will not find O my Lord most of them 
thankful to You, because of the denial and ingrati¬ 
tude I will lead them to. 

@ Allah said: ‘Go down from Paradise O Satan, 
humiliated and removed from My mercy. I will cer¬ 
tainly fill Hell with you and all those who follow and obey you and go against My command. 

(Sj| Then Allah told Adam: ‘O Adam go and dwell you and your wife Eve in the Paradise, and eat from the good things 
in it, but do not approach and eat from that tree, for if you both eat from that tree after My prohibiting it you would be of 
those who transgress My limits.’ 

Satan told them: ‘Allah has only forbidden you from eating from that tree because He does not want you to become 
angels or to live eternally in Paradise.’ 

@ Satan swore to the two of them saying: ‘By Allah I am to you both, O Adam and Eve, a sincere advisor in what I 
direct you to.’ 

(jp So Satan brought them down from their high position through trickery and deception. When they ate from the tree 
which they had been forbidden to eat from, their private parts became exposed and visible to them. So they started to fix 
leaves from Paradise onto themselves in order to cover up. Their Lord called to them: ‘Did I not forbid you both from 
eating from this tree, and did I not warn you that Satan is your clear enemy?’ 

<*} Beneficial Points: 

1. Iblis was the first to draw an incorrect analogy and went far astray. 

2. The verses show that whoever goes against their Lord is made lowly. 

3. Allah’s response to Iblis, giving him time, was actually an announcement of something that had already taken place, 
and not a response to his request, because he is too contemptible to have his request answered. 

4. Satan announced his enmity towards the children of Adam, and promised to prevent them from following the straight 
path in every means and every way. 

5. Whoever is like Adam, through acknowledging, asking for forgiveness, regretting and giving up wrongdoing if they 
have sinned, their Lord will choose them and guide them. 

6. Whoever is like Satan when he sins, by persisting in it and being stubborn, they will only increase in distance from 
Allah. 























< 3 ^=c] Qyz^3 ob l^Us 12 /^ Is 

^ iafi ^ ^ 

j*k==k jJ-AP\S (^) ^r5 

W^L? Ljj^^WrA \\i( ^ ^ l| 

^^C-Ac'L^JjJ^ JsS^o\ g-Tp-^. (^) v—i^_q^si^-L^ pA 9 ii)jP^<*— 5 

^yy}^ L3 

' JoV*2^i {^) OJ/LL ^4^ 4J^ Ol^\ £ (1x5 <£iiL 

u4^ &%$ g^r 

3)5j ^y^sj^ALi—L3 

Oi^£t^ o^L-^ ^ uL*^rLl j^ 4 LL?Ll j^>- 
l_j^\ \^ £L>\^l^lk>L .aj>^ Lj \s a2ls>£ 3 LL^o \ ^ (^) 


-X^x-i.^xg 3^— A^P^ 


@ Adam and Eve said: ‘O our Lord! We have 
wronged ourselves by doing what You forbade us 
from, and surely If You do not forgive us and have 
mercy on us we will be amongst the losers, losing 
our share of the worldly life and Hereafter.’ 

(jp Allah told Adam, Eve and Satan: ‘Go down 
from Paradise to the earth, where some of you will 
be enemies of others, and where you would have a 
place to settle with enjoyment of what is in the earth 
until an appointed time.’ 

@ Allah addressed Adam and Eve and their de¬ 
scendants: ‘On this Earth you will live for the 
length of time I decree for you, and on this Earth 
you will die. After being buried, you will be taken 
out from your graves and brought back to life.’ 
(Sj) O children of Adam, Allah made for you cloth¬ 
ing, necessary for covering your nakedness, and 
clothing for you to adorn yourselves with, and the 
clothing of Mindfulness, which is through follow¬ 
ing what Allah instructs and staying away from 
what He has not allowed, which is better than the 
physical types of clothing. 

What is mentioned here about clothing is from 
among the signs of Allah, showing His power over 
y everything, so that perhaps people will remember 
His blessings to them and be thankful for them, 
(jjj) O children of Adam, do not let Satan deceive 
you by making disobedience look beautiful to you, 
making you leave covering your nakedness with 
clothing, or leave the clothing of Mindfulness. Do 
not be deceived as he tricked your parents, making 
eating from the tree seem good to them, and the 
result of that was that he got them expelled from 
Paradise, and their nakedness became clear to them. Satan and his tribe watch and see you, and you cannot see or watch 
them, so always be on your guard against him and his tribe. Allah made the satans friends and helpers of those who do not 
have faith in Allah. As for those who have faith and do good, the satans have no way against them. 

@ If the idolaters commit an indecent act, they defend it, saying they found their fathers doing it and that Allah had 
commanded them to do it. Tell them O Muhammad: ‘Indeed Allah does not command the wrong, rather, He forbids it, 
so how can you claim such a thing about Him? Or are you O Idolators inventing things about Allah, saying what you do 
not know about Him?’ 

@ Say O Muhammad: ‘Indeed Allah commands justice, not indecency or sin. And He commands loyalty to Him in wor¬ 
ship generally, and particularly in places of worship, that you call on Him alone, sincere in your dedication to Him.’ As 
He created you from nothing the first time. He will bring you back to life a second time. He Who is able to create you in 
the first place is able to return you and bring you back to life. 

{jp Allah made people into two groups: one group of them He guided, making it easy for them to find guidance and 
removing the barriers to it; and another He made go astray from the path of truth, because they made the satans their 
friends and helpers instead of Allah, ignorantly becoming bound to them, considering themselves to be correctly guided 
to a straight path. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. There are two types of clothing: outer clothing that covers a person’s body parts that should be covered; and inner 
clothing, which is Mindfulness, and it is to be a permanent characteristic of the servant, as in beauty of the heart and the 
soul. 

2. Many of the helpers of Satan call for the removal of outward clothing to reveal the parts of the body which should be 
covered, making it easy for people to do reprehensible things and to commit immorality. 

3. The commands and prohibitions of sacred law are based on perfect wisdom and contain the best interests of humanity. 

4. Guidance is by Allah’s grace; and misguidance is by His forsaking someone who Satan takes control of, so that he acts 
with ignorance and disobedience, which causes his own misguidance. 


\ Jc£-A£>\jb Jp 


Al-A‘raf 


153 


















@ O children of Adam, dress beautifully in every 
place of worship, and eat and drink, but do not be 
extravagant. Truly, He does not love those who are 
extravagant. 

O children of Adam, wear clean, pure, beautiful, 
clothes that cover your nakedness when you pray 
and when you make circumambulation of the Kaa- 
ba. Eat and drink whatever you like from the good 
things that Allah has allowed. But do not be extrav¬ 
agant in this, nor go beyond what is allowed. Allah 
does not love those who go beyond the limits. 

@ Say O Messenger to the idolaters who forbid 
what Allah has allowed of clothing and food; ‘Who 
has forbidden you from wearing clothes as adorn¬ 
ment, and who has forbidden you from eating the 
good things I have provided you to eat and drink?’ 

Say to them O Messenger: ‘These good things to 
eat and drink and wear are in this world, for the 
believers; while others may share in them in this 
world, they are exclusively for the believers on the 
Day of Judgement when the disbelievers will not 
have a share in them, because the disbelievers have 
been forbidden Paradise.’ Likewise Allah makes 
clear His signs and ayahs in this way for people 
who reflect, because it is they who benefit from 
them. (Sj> Say O Messenger (peace be upon him) 
to inform the idolaters who have forbidden what 
Allah has allowed: ‘Indeed Allah has only forbid¬ 
den lewd indecent acts done openly or secretly, all 
forms of disobedience, and transgressing unjustly 
against people in terms of their selves, wealth, or 
honour. And He has forbidden worshipping others 
next to Him — for which there is no proof to do so. 

And He has forbidden that you say things about Him wihout knowledge, in terms of His Names, Attributes, Actions and 
sacred law. j§j) Every generation and people are given a fixed time. If their decreed time arrives, they cannot delay it, 
even by a small amount, and they cannot advance it. @ O children of Adam, if messengers of your own come to you 
from Allah, reciting what Allah has revealed to them from His scripture, then follow them and what they bring. Those 
who are Mindful, following His instructions and staying away from what He has not allowed, making right what they do, 
there will be no fear upon them on the Day of Judgement, and they will not grieve about the pleasures that passed them 
by in this world. As for the disbelievers, who reject Allah’s signs, and do not have faith in them, too proud to act in 
accordance with what their messengers bring to them, they are the companions of Hell, where they will live eternally. 
@) The greatest wrongdoer is the person who: invents a lie about Allah, considering Him to have a partner; or says He 
is deficient in some way; or says something about Him that He has not said; or rejects His clear signs and verses which 
guide to the correct way of life. Those who do such things will receive the portion of worldly pleasure that is destined for 
them in the Preserved Tablet, until the angel of death and his helpers come to them to take their souls, and they are asked: 
‘Where are the Allahs you used to worship besides Allah, claiming they would help you? Call on those idols if they can 
benefit you! The idolaters will say to the angels: ‘The Allahs we used to worship have gone, and that we do not know 
where they are!’ Then they will admit that they were disbelievers, but their admission at that time will be a proof against 
them and will not benefit them. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The believer is instructed to respect the rituals of Allah through covering what should be covered of the body and 
dressing beautifully when praying and especially when going to the mosque. 2. From Allah’s complete concern for His 
creatures He made the good things permissible for them, to help them in their devotion to Allah, just as He forbade harm¬ 
ful things which have a negative effect in this world and in the Hereafter. 3. The verses establish that the believers will 
not feel fear or sorrow on the Day of Judgement, nor will terror or panic reach them; and if they do suffer some harm, 
they will nevertheless be safe in the end. 4. The greatest of wrongdoers are people who obstruct others from understand¬ 
ing the religion of Allah. This may happen in two ways: suppressing that which shows His Way, or deluding people into 
following that which is contrary to His Command. 


e <Jy* 


\ot 




* 






L? 




1? j^=sj\ ^ 

'ey) 


Al-A‘raf 
















{j§5 The angels will say: ‘Enter you O idolaters the 
fire of Hell with the crowds of nations of jinn and 
people who passed away before you in disbelief 
and error!’. Whenever a nation enters Hell it con¬ 
demns its sister nation which entered the fire of 
Hell before it, until they all reach one another and 
are gathered together. The last of them to enter, who 
are the lowly people and followers will ask con¬ 
cerning the previous nations who were their leaders 
and masters: ‘O our Lord! These are the ones who 
led us astray from right guidance, so give them a 
double punishment, for that they beautified for us 
the path of misguidance.’ Allah will reply to them: 
‘Each group of you will receive a doubled share of 
the punishment; but you will not perceive this.’ 

@ The leaders and chiefs will exclaim: ‘You do not 
have, O followers, over us any preference, there¬ 
fore deserving any lightening of the punishment, as 
it is the result of your own actions. You do not have 
any excuse for having followed what was false. So 
taste then, O followers, the punishment just as we 
taste it, because of what you earned through your 
own disbelief and disobedience. 

Those who reject Allah’s clear signs and vers¬ 
es, and are too proud to follow them, have lost 
everything, because the gates of heaven will not 
open to their actions because of their disbelief; nor 
will they open for their souls when they die. Such 
people will never enter Paradise until the camel - 
one of the largest animals - goes into the eye of a 
needle - one of the smallest things. The aforemen¬ 
tioned is impossible, and so is the idea that they 
will ever enter Paradise. In such a way does Allah 

reward those who stubbornly do wrong. 

@ For these people who rejected the truth, because they were too proud, is a bed of Hell to lie on, and above them is a 
covering of torment. This is the way in which Allah rewards those who overstep His limits through their disbelief in Him, 
and through their turning away from Him. 

@ Yet those who have faith in their Lord and who do good actions to the best of their ability - and Allah does not burden 
a soul with more than it can bear - they are the companions of Paradise, entering into it and living there eternally. 

(S§p Their bliss in Paradise is made complete by Allah removing whatever hatred and resentment is in their hearts, with 
rivers running beneath them. When they come to live there and settle in their homes, they will exclaim whilst recognizing 
Allah’s blessings on them, praising Him: ‘All praise and thanks belongs to Allah Who allowed us to do the good actions 
which brought us to this place, and we would not have been able to do that if Allah had not enabled us to do so. The 
messengers of our Lord came with the truth about which there was no doubt, true in its promises of good for the righteous 
and true in its threats for the wrongdoers. It will then be announced to them: ‘This, truly this, is the Paradise which Allah 
has made you inherit out of His Mercy, for the good actions you used to do seeking the countenance of Allah.’ 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The friendship and closeness that was between those who denied the truth in this world will turn into hatred and con¬ 
demnation on the Day of Judgement. 

2. The doors of heaven will be opened to the souls of the believers dedicated to the command of Allah, trusting His signs, 
until they ascend to Allah, and rejoice in the nearness to their Lord, and the position of favour with His pleasure. 

3. The doors of heaven will not open to the souls of those who denied the truth, who turn away. When they die they rise 
up to the heavens and ask for permission to ascend but are not given it. They did not rise in the worldly life to have faith 
in Allah, and to know Him and love Him, so they also do not rise after death. Ultimately they will only reap what they 
sowed. 

4. The people of Paradise are saved from the fire of Hell by Allah’s pardon, and enter Paradise with Allah’s mercy. 
Though they share the ranks given to them according to their good actions, which is also from His Kindness and of the 
highest expressions of His Mercy. 




\\oo: 

















^ „ j * __' -y ^ £ 


(£) 4 \jzyj % 


i 




















@ The companions of Paradise will call the com¬ 
panions of Hell when they have all entered their 
places, saying: ‘Indeed we have found what our 
Lord promised us about Paradise to be true, as 
we have entered into it. Have you found what Al¬ 
lah had promised you about Hell to be true?’ The 
disbelievers will reply: ‘We have found what was 
promised about Hell to be true.’ Then a caller will 
proclaim that the wrongdoers be removed from Al¬ 
lah’s mercy, because the doors of His mercy were 
open to them and they turned away from them in 
their worldly life. 

@ These wrongdoers used to themselves turn away 
from Allah’s religion, and used to turn others away 
from it, wanting to make the path of truth seem 
crooked so that people would not follow it. They 
also rejected the Afterlife, not believing in it, nor 
preparing for it. 

@ Between these two groups - the companions of 
Paradise and the companions of Hell - is a partition 
called ‘al-A‘raf’, meaning ‘the Heights’. On this 
partition are people whose good and bad actions 
are equal. They know the companions of Paradise 
by their signs, such as the light on their faces, and 
the companions of Hell by their signs, such as the 
darkness on their faces. These people of the par¬ 
tition call the companions of Paradise, honouring 
them, saying, ‘Peace be upon you’. They do not 
enter Paradise yet, but they hope to enter it through 
Allah’s mercy. 

@ When their eyes turn to the people who are the 
companions of Hell, and they see the severe pun¬ 
ishment they are afflicted with, they pray: ‘O our 
Lord! Do not put us with the wrongdoers, who disbelieved and worshipped others besides you! 

@ The companions of the Heights will call to people in Hell who had disbelieved, whom they recognize by their marks: 
;It did not benefit you in the slightest when they used to gather together to prevent people from Allah’s path and arrogant¬ 
ly turn away from the truth.’ 

(S§§) Those who disbelieve will say concerning the believers: ‘Are these faithful people those you swore Allah would not 
show mercy to?’ Then these people who have faith will be told to enter Paradise, not fearing what awaits them, and not 
grieving over the pleasures of the world which passed them by, because of the eternal bliss they find themselves in. 

The companions of Hell will call the companions of Paradise, begging them to pour some water or provide some of 
the food they have been given onto them. The companions of Paradise will tell them that Allah has forbidden both of 
these to the disbelievers, because of their disbelief, and that they will not help them in what Allah has forbidden for them. 
© These disbelievers are the ones who used to mock and make fun of faith and were deluded by the life of the world, 
being engrossed in its pleasures and luxuries. On the Day of Judgement, Allah will forget them, and they will be left to 
suffer the punishment because they forgot the meeting of the Day of Judgement which they neglected despite them having 
full knowledge of it. They rejected Allah’s signs and proofs in condemnation, despite knowing and recognizing the truth 
of His message. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Lack of faith in the resurrection is a direct reason for following vain desires. 

2. People will realise clearly on the Day of Judgement that the promise of Allah, to those devoted to Him as well as to the 
disbelievers, was the absolute truth. 

3. People will be in two groups on the Day of Judgement: one group in Paradise and one group in Hell. Yet between them 
will be a group in the middle whose good actions and bad actions were equal on the balance. In spite of that, their ultimate 
destination will be Paradise. 

4. Those who possess wealth, rank, and followers, must realise that all of this will not help them in any way before Allah, 
and will not save them from Allah’s punishment if they deserve it. 









'Zfi 




J \y l^=» \6 j \ aia 


Al-A‘raf 

















\ ov 




g 

ij\j> S^ (^ 0^J^i ^yk~ 

J JlJci S^ Li \^til^-s 

^ \j>i^=\S > jl £^ uu \ \£L?-=~-^ u>£= 

< -Vtr c.f-'jV At tft £'<"■* \*>s ^ >' ?- 5C aay ' inose wll ° | g nored tlie W 

this world, not acting according 

^ ^yy, * y. <Z> u> k£. y*^, ^ ^>y J */t s' tV»o« P-Jic ‘T nAaaA tUo mocoatmai 

^ J*S-^ ATL-^j c3 


{|§5 And Allah has indeed sent them this Qur’an, the 
Scripture revealed to Muhammad (peace be upon 
J j him), explaining it and clarifying all things with 

W His Knowledge. It guides the believers to the right 
path and to the truth, and is a mercy for them be¬ 
cause of what it guides them to, of goodness in this 
world and in the Afterlife. 

Those who disbelieve in reality only wait for 
what they have been warned: a painful punishment 
in the Afterlife as a result of their actions. The be¬ 
lievers were also foretold about the reward of that 
day. Those who ignored the Qur’an in the life of 

to what is in it, will 
then say: ‘Indeed the messengers of our Lord came 
with the truth, in which there was no doubt. If only 
there was a mediator who could now plead on our 
behalf so we could be excused from the punish¬ 
ment. Or if only we could return to the life of the 
world to do good actions that would save us instead 
of the bad we committed!’ The disbelievers have 
lost themselves, gaining their own ruin because of 
their disbelief. Those who they used to worship be¬ 
side Allah have abandoned them, and can be of no 
help to them. 

@ O people, your Lord is Allah, who created the 
heavens and the earth in six days, with no prece¬ 
dent. He established Himself on the Throne in a 
way befitting His Majesty. He made the darkness 
of the night disappear into the light of the day and 
the light of the day into the darkness of night, both 
chasing each other quickly so that neither is de¬ 
layed. He also created the sun, the moon and the 
stars all subservient under His dominion. Is the 
whole of creation not His? Who besides Him is creator? His alone is the command. He is High above any flaw. He is 
described with the attributes of splendour and perfection- the Lord of the Worlds. 

O believers, call on your Lord with complete humility, silently and in private, sincere in your prayer, not showing 
off, and not worshipping others along with Allah in your prayers. He does not love those who overstep the limits in their 
prayers; and one of the worst ways someone can do this is by invoking others besides Him, as the idolaters do. 

@ Do not ruin things on earth by committing sins after Allah has put it right by sending the messengers (peace be upon 
them) and establishing things in accordance with His laws. Call on Allah alone, fearing His punishment and hoping for 
His reward. The mercy of Allah is truly close to those who do good, so be from among them. 

@ It is Allah who sends the winds as good news of coming rain, until when they carry a cloud heavy with water He 
drives the cloud to a barren land and sends down rain on it, bringing out all kinds of fruits and crops. The way that this 
vegetation is brought out is similar to the way the dead will be brought out of the graves and back to life. This is, O 
people, so that perhaps you will then reflect on the power of Allah and the wonder of His creation, and that He is able to 
bring the dead to life. 

Beneficial Points: 

1. The noble Qur’an is a book of guidance detailing that which humanity needs, as a mercy from Allah. 

2. Allah’s promise will definitely come true, and then the disbelievers will be certain of the truth of Allah’s promise. 

3. Allah created the heavens and the earth in six days for a wisdom He willed, glory be to Him. If He had wanted He could 
have said to it ‘Be! ’ and it would have been created immediately. 

4. It is necessary for the believers to call upon Allah Most High with complete humility and supplication until He re¬ 
sponds to them through His grace. 

5. Causing corruption on the earth in any way or form is forbidden. 




>■ 


iiJlXi 




Al-A‘raf 


157 






















@ Good land produces vegetation in abundance, 
by Allah’s permission. Likewise, the believer un¬ 
derstands the teachings they are given and they 
benefit from them, acting accordingly with right¬ 
eousness. 

On the other hand, the rotten, salty land only pro¬ 
duces vegetation in small amounts, and there is 
little goodness in what it produces. Likewise, the 
disbeliever will not benefit from the true teachings 
they receive, and will not perform good actions that 
benefit him. Through such variation Allah reveals 
His signs and proofs in different ways, to confirm 
the truth to a people who are thankful for Allah’s 
blessings, who do not disbelieve them, and who 
follow their Lord. Indeed I sent Noah as a mes¬ 
senger to his people calling them to the Oneness 
of Allah and to leave off worshipping anything be¬ 
sides Him. Noah said to them: ‘O people! Worship 
Allah alone, you have no true Allah except Him. I 
fear for you O people, the punishment of a great 
day if you persist in your disbelief.’ @ The lead¬ 
ers and notables among his people said: ‘O Noah! 

Indeed we think you are in clear error. @ Noah 
told the leaders of his people: T am not in error, 
as you claim, but rather I am on guidance from my 
Lord, and I am a messenger from Him who is my 
Lord, your Lord, and the Lord of all creations. 

T only convey to you the revelation Allah has sent 
me with. I only want what is good for you when I 
encourage you to follow what Allah instructed and 
to receive the reward for doing so, and warn you 
from what Allah has prohibited and the punishment 
you would receive for disobeying Him. And I know 
from Allah may He be Exalted what you do not know, because of the knowledge Allah has given to me through revela¬ 
tion. ‘ (jp ‘ Do you find it strange O people, that revelation and good teaching has come to you from your Lord on the 
tongue of a man from amongt yourselves whom you know well?! I have grown up amongst you and I have never been a 
liar or misguided, nor have I come to you from another people. I have come to warn you about the punishment of Allah 
so that you might follow His instructions and stay away from what He has prohibited hoping that then you would receive 
Mercy through having faith in Him.’ (S§»| However, Noah’s people rejected him, and did not have faith in Allah, but con¬ 
tinued in their disbelief. Noah at last asked Allah to destroy the disbelievers. Allah saved Noah and those who were with 
him and who had faith from drowning, by enabling them to retreat in the Ark. He destroyed those who rejected His signs, 
and who continued rejecting them, drowning them in a great flood as their punishment. Indeed they were a people whose 
hearts were blind to the truth. @) And I sent to the people of ‘Ad a messenger whose name was Hud (peace be upon him). 
Hud said to them: ‘O people! Worship Allah alone, for you have no true Allah except Him, will you not then be mindful 
of Him by following His instructions and staying away from what He has prohibited, so that you would be saved from 
His punishment?’ @ The leaders and notables among his people who disbelieved in Allah and rejected His messenger 
said: Indeed we only think you O Hud as someone foolish and backward, calling us to worship Allah alone, and to leave 
the worship of our idols. In fact we are certain that you are a liar in claiming that you have been sent by Allah!’ @ Hud 
replied: “O my people I am not foolish or backward, but I am a messenger from the Lord of the Worlds.” 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Good earth is given as an example for good hearts; and just as rain is the substance of life, likewise, the Revelation 
that descends is the substance of life for the hearts. When Revelation comes to good hearts, they recognise it, accept it, 
and grow according to their good foundation and characteristics, and likewise the opposite is true. 2. The prophets and 
messengers felt compassion for people even more than the compassion of their fathers and mothers. 3. It is Allah’s way to 
send each messenger from his own people and in their language, uniting the hearts of those whose natural disposition has 
not been corrupted, and making recognition and understanding the religion easier. 4. Among the greatest fools are those 
who reject and deny the truth, too proud to follow scholars and advisers, their heart submitting to every scheming satan. 






s' ^ >0 ^s ^ 9} s' s' 




/■ ^-= c~3 

\^\j yjiv? sj# 




> H ■ 








tT) (j*\j\j <\_S*Csusj 

















(0 4 I am only conveying what Allah had instruct¬ 
ed me to deliver to you, that you belief in Allah’s 
Oneness and His sacred law. I am to you all a trust¬ 
worthy adviser, delivering what I am instructed, no 
less or more.’ 

<0 ‘Is it strange and amazing that a reminder should 
come to you from your Lord from a man amongst 
you and from your likeness, not through an angel 
or a jinn. Thank Allah and praise Him for having 
established you on the earth making you successors 
to the people of Noah who were destroyed because 
of their disbelief. Thank Allah for having favoured 
you by making you strong in stature, and remember 
Allah’s great blessings on you so that you may be 
succesful, attaining what you desire and avoiding 
what is feared.’ 

(0 Hud’s people said: ‘Have you come to tell us to 
worship Allah alone and to leave what our parents 
and ancestors worshipped! Bring us the punishment 
you promise if you are telling the truth in what you 
claim.’ 

(0 Hud said: ‘Already the punishment of Allah 
and His Anger is on its way! Do you argue with me 
about idols you and your fathers have called Allahs, 
when they have no basis, since Allah has sent down 
no proof of their divinity. Wait then for the punish¬ 
ment you ask for, for I am also waiting, for indeed 
it is on its way.’ 

@ So Allah saved Hud (peace be upon him), and 
those of the believers who were with him, through 
a mercy from Him, and He removed and destroyed 
those who rejected His signs, who did not have 
faith and deserved their punishment because of 


their denial. 

@ Then Allah sent to the tribe of Thamud their brother Salih, to call them to belief in the Oneness of Allah and to worship 
Him alone. Salih said: ‘O People! Believe in Allah alone, you have no other Allah worthy of being worshipped. I have 
come to you with a sign proving the truth of what I have brought you: namely a camel which will come out of a rock. It 
has an allocated time to drink from the water, and for you a seperate time to drink. Allow her to eat within Allah’s land 
and do not harm her in any way, or a painful punishment would befall you.’ 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. One should show patience in calling people to Allah, following the example of the Prophets, peace be upon them. 

2. Some of the main priorities in calling people to Allah are calling them to worship Allah alone, without any partners, 
and to reject and dismiss associating anything with Him. 

3. Being dazzled by material and physical strength distracts one from responding to what Allah has instructed and for¬ 
bidden. 

4. The prophet is like his people, but he is the most noble of them in lineage, the highest of them in rank, the best of them 
in society, and the highest of them in character and morals. 

5. The prophets and their inheritors meet the foolish with patience, overlooking the bad things they say with forgiveness 
and pardon. 

6. The result of rebelliousness, pride and tyranny is ruin and destruction. 

7. It is the custom of Allah to save the believers and destroy those who turn away. 























[nil 






I 


^ ~0 —< C> a 

I u$\ '§^S\ J\5 (£) ^Jej^S | 

O^oA_ ic\ jL^Xa^^W^v^^jjLat^aX-^ -^y lUaA^jS 

L-jVlA^ 13 <iA-JJ jj5 3 -J "iJA“Aj-cLl^£’ O^ 

jj£-P9 A3L2 j\ j^JLaScj ^vA^==>^Aj ^JL-Xa)g. 


3-‘'-‘=-= V^i l_3_5 > 4p3S^ 

^J>^a<2> X5is>z)\ j^3 jX-\a{^0^*i/^6^- 
j£==tzJAj\ Jl3>5 


@ ‘Praise Allah for making you representatives on 
the earth after the destruction of the people of ‘Ad 
who had persevered in disbelief, and thank Him for 
establishing you in the land so that you could enjoy 
it and satisfy your desires. You build palaces in the 
plains and carve houses for yourselves out of the 
mountains. Remember Allah’s blessings upon you 
and thank Him for them, and do not to put your 
efforts into causing corruption on earth and leave 
off your disbelief in Allah and your disobedience 
to Him. 

@ The leaders and important people, who looked 
down in pride at the people who had faith, those 
they considered to be weak, asked them: ‘Do you 
really know that Salih is a messenger from Allah?’ 

The believers replied: ‘We have sure faith in him, 
and we act in agreement with what he has brought 
us.’ 

@ The arrogant among his people said: ‘Indeed 
we dibelieve in what you have faith in, O believers, 
and we will not have faith in it nor act in agreement 
with its sacred laws.’ 

@ So they killed the camel which they had been 
forbidden to harmfully touch, too proud to follow 
Allah’s command. Doubting what Salih had prom¬ 
ised would happen, they mocked him saying: ‘O 
Salih! Bring the painful punishment you have told 
us would afflict us, If you really are a messenger 
from Allah!’ 

@ When the punishment the disbelievers had 
asked for arrived, and they were taken by a great 
earthquake, so that in the morning they lay fallen, 
their faces and knees on the earth, none of them 
escaping from the destruction. 

(Sj) Salih (peace be upon him) turned away from his people, having given up all hope for them. He said: ‘O people, I had 
delivered what Allah had instructed me to deliver to you, and had advised you well, encouraging and warning you, but 
you were a people who did not have any love for sincere advisers who wanted to lead you to goodness and distance you 
from evil. 

(jj) Allah sent Lot to his people to call them to belief in the Oneness of Allah and to stop them from rebelling against 
Him. He said: ‘Do you commit such a forbidden and shameful act as sodomy, when no one before you has committed 
such a crime!’ 

Up ‘Do you go to men to satisfy your lust instead of women, who you were supposed to go to?! Then in that case you 
have not followed sense or any sound report or even what is natural! Rather you have gone beyond the limits of Allah, 
overstepping the bounds of moderation, good sense and the natural nobility of humankind. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Pride often comes from having a lot of wealth or high rank, while having little wealth and position often leads to faith 
and trust and devotion. 

2. It is permissible to build great buildings, such as palaces and the like, because beautiful buildings, alongside gratitude 
to the Giver of blessings, are from the signs of divine bounty. 

3. For the most part when the Prophets call people to Allah the weak and the poor rush to listen to the words of truth which 
they bring, while the nobles and leaders are insolent and think themselves above it. 

4. The punishment of Allah can fall upon the whole society, including good people, if there is a great deal of evil in it and 
a lack of condemnation of it. 























J>-\ \ Si l^=al^aj 

^>U®^_^fi£==^v 
^ (^ ^ ^aL-5^5 J 

^L/ye^d^^ <^ a!p 


@ His people, who committed this shameless 
wrong which they had been forbidden from doing, 
only responded by turning away from the truth, 
saying: ‘Drive Lot and his followers out of your 
city. They are a people who have kept away from 
this action of ours, so it is not befitting that they 
stay living here among us.’ 

{§p So Allah saved Lot and his family by instructing 
them to leave the city by night. His family were 
saved except for his wife, who remained behind in 


4 j^\ S* the city and suffered the same punishment as the 

^ *5 X\\ ~ t "w" 



> ^ pjb 





rest. 

(Sj§S> Allah brought down upon them a great rain of 
rocks of baked clay, overturning the city and turn¬ 
ing it upside down. So consider what the end of the 
sinful people of Lot was. Their end was ruin and 
eternal disgrace. 

(fj§5 To the tribe of Midian Allah sent their brother 
Shu‘ayb (peace be upon him). He said: ‘O people! 
Worship Allah alone for you have no Allah wor- 


j \3 -\-aJD J* thy of worship other than Him. A clear proof from 







^ 

<> *0 


| Al-A‘raf 

161 1 


Part 8 \ 


Allah has come to you confirming what I bring to 
you from your Lord is the truth. Give people their 
rights, by measuring and weighing things correct¬ 
ly, not short-changing people by saying bad things 
about their goods, or by cheating them, and do 
not to cause corruption on earth through disbelief 
and disobedience after things have been set right 
through the sending of prophets. All of this is better 
for you and more beneficial if you are believers, be¬ 
cause then you would leave disobedience, and draw 
close to Allah by doing what He has commanded.’ 
‘Do not sit in wait on every road, threatening the 
people travelling there in order to steal their possessions, and preventing those who want to be guided from the path of 
Allah, wanting the path of Allah to be crooked so that people would not follow it. Remember the blessings of Allah upon 
you so that you might be thankful, for you had been few in the land and He increased your numbers. Reflect on what 
had been the end of those who caused corruption in the earth before you, since their end had been destruction and ruin!’ 
(Jp ‘And if there is a group among you who believe in what I have brought from my Lord, and another group who did 
not believe in it, then you, O deniers, should wait to see how Allah judges between the two groups. It would then become 
clear who stood for the truth and who were liars; and that those who stand for the truth will be saved, while those who 
are liars will be destroyed.’ 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Sodomy is an immoral act that leads to the degeneration of one’s natural disposition. It does great damage, and it has 
a severe punishment. 2. The prophets’ calling people to Allah, among them Shu’ayb (peace be upon him), was based on 
two principles: establishing the rights of Allah, which includes recognition that there is only one Allah and the belief in 
prophethood; and compassion to Allah’s creation, which means not neglecting their rights, causing corrupting, or doing 
any type of harm. 3. Causing corruption in the earth after things have been put right is a social crime against humanity, be¬ 
cause putting things right on earth through correct beliefs and right behaviour is beneficial for everyone, and causing cor¬ 
ruption on earth is a crime against people. 4. One of the greatest and most immoral sins is to take someones belongings 
or property without right, for it comprises injustice, and the approving of wrong publicly. 5. The end of those who cause 
corruption is disgrace and being made an example of, and for this reason it is necessary to keep away from corruption and 
disobedience. 6. Knowledge alone is not enough to correct society, rather what is necessary for correcting communities 
and people is goodly instruction and teaching, convincing people thereby of the benefits of virtues, such as truthfulness, 
trustworthiness, and justice, and of the disadvantages of deviation and vices. This is because Allah-given self-restraint is 
stronger and greater than any legal deterrent or sanction. 7. It is necessary for the believers to show patience until Allah 
helps them against the people of falsehood, making them overcome them. 
























nr 




\ J \a * |jj| 

J \S lxjJl£ <j 0 ljx^j\ Gl-£3 L^ 0^)j 

jSc j^L* <J|\j Ji> oUj J3 {^) 

<j\S£)\ \ji Q^3\i3\^3oA 4^\\^J«£i\_ J 

\ <J \ij (^) S^- cU) )j o^j 1^4* j 

ojj^Jj>ci \ (j^i \ 

^ <ji £ ^ ^ o ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ f-^ 

iJ-rU^ C^ ^yy^p>r^y 5 

\M^\}^'u$^^Jo&ifS\yM 


@ The leaders and important people who were 
proud among the people of Shu’ayb (peace be upon 
him) said: ‘We will drive you out of our city O 
Shu’ayb, you and those with you who believe you, 
unless you and they return back to your old way 
of life and worship. Shu‘ayb said in astonishment: 

‘Should we return to a way of life and religion 
that we hate because we know what falsehood it is 
based on?!’ 

@ ‘If we follow what you believe of disbelief and 
polytheism after we have been saved from it by Al¬ 
lah’s grace, we would have invented a lie against 
Him. It would not be appropriate or right for us to 
return to your false religion unless Allah wills us to 
do so - as we will do whatever He wills. Allah sur¬ 
rounds everything in knowledge, and so He knows 
what is right for His slaves. Nothing is hidden from 
Him. We put our trust in Allah alone, so He will 
make us firm on the right path and protect us from 
the ways leading to Hell. O our Lord! Judge be¬ 
tween us and these disbelieving people with the 
truth, and help those who hold to the truth and those 
who are wronged against those who are wrongdo¬ 
ers. You O Lord are the best of Judges.’. 

(S§| The important people and leaders of his people 
who refused the call to believe in the Oneness of 
Allah, warned people against Shu’ayb and his faith, 
saying: ‘O people, if you follow Shu’ayb’s path, 
leaving the way of life of our ancestors, you would 
certainly find ruin through doing so.’ 

$ So a great earthquake took them; and in the 
morning they were dead in their homes, fallen on 
their knees and faces. 

@ Those who rejected Shu’ayb were all destroyed, and it was as if they had never lived in their homes or found enjoy¬ 
ment there.Those who rejected Shu’ayb were the losers, losing themselves and their possessions, whereas those who had 
faith did not fail in the least, contrary to what those who disbelieved claimed. 

Then their prophet Shu‘ayb (peace be upon him) turned from them when they were destroyed saying: ‘O people! 
Indeed I had delivered what my Lord had instructed me to deliver to you, and I had given you good advice; but you had 
not taken my advice, nor followed my guidance, so how then can I grieve for a people who disbelieved in Allah and 
insisted on disbelief?’ 

@ Allah did not send a prophet to any city, the people of which denied and rejected the truth, except that He tried them 
with suffering and poverty and illness so that they might humble themselves before Allah, and leave their pride and dis¬ 
belief. This was a warning for Quraysh and for all peoples who disbelieve and reject the way of Allah. 

@ After trying them with suffering and illness Allah improved their situation and turned their suffering into well-being 
and safety, until they became many and their wealth increased, and they said that the bad and good that they had ex¬ 
perienced was a normal part of life and that the same thing had happened to their ancestors before them. They did not 
recognise that there was a lesson to be learned in the difficulties that occurred to them and that there was a test for them 
in the good that they were given. Then Allah overtook them suddenly with the punishment, while they were unaware of 
it and did not expect it. 

Beneficial Points: 

1. From the manifestations of the generosity of Allah to His righteous servants is his opening the doors of knowledge to 
them, through making clear what is true from what is false, and saving the believers and giving a the punishment to the 
disbelievers. 

2. It is the way of Allah among his servants to give them time, so that they learn lessons from events and root out whatever 
sins and destructive behaviour they may engage in. 

3. Many show patience when facing difficulty, and bear its hardship. As for trials caused by having great wealth, few are 
patient in such circumstances and remain within the limits of Allah’s sacred law. 

4. Faith and good actions cause blessings to descend from the heaven and appear on the earth upon the nation. 


yyy y\ ’Si ^ $jyy====> 

$33 





















n 




o[Pj 

ly p-^ 5 xJ& \y_ xk=> &~l 3 Jfj^)j elLii \ 5d 

L.—^<\j ^ f i ‘~— 

_.^“i-? ^ > A'~ >' s->. \< A,-* 

AS i'U^L3'( vp^ • ^ Jitb^-JbSj^ni^U-^L) 

0 \ ^4Ji[ 5 ^=^ 
’t\^J&$^J\ C£A_a\ j^Jo ^ Oj&. 



Ijp If the people of the towns and cities which Allah 
sent His messengers to had believed in what their 
messengers brought them, and had been mindful of 
their Lord, leaving their disbelief and disobedience 
and following His commands, then Allah would 
have opened the doors of goodness upon them in 
every way; but they did not believe and were not 
mindful of Him. Instead they rejected what their 
prophets came with. So Allah overtook them with 
the punishment suddenly because of what they had 
earned through their sins and disobedience. 

(S§J) So do the people who reject the truth in these 
cities feel safe from the punishment of Allah over¬ 
coming them in the night while they are sleeping? 
djj) Or do they feel safe from the punishment of Al¬ 
lah overcoming them during the day, mid- morn¬ 
ing, while they are amusing themselves forgetfully, 
busy with the life of this world? 

@ Look at the blessings Allah has given them of 
strength and abundance, how He gave them as a 
means of testing them. Do these people who reject 
the truth among the people of these cities feel safe 
from Allah’s plan and His faultless arrangement of 
things? No one feels safe from Allah’s plan except 
a people who are lost. 

Yet those who are successful fear His Planning. 
They do not become amazed and proud because of 
what Allah has given to them, but rather see His 
Generosity to them and are thankful to Him. 

|§| Is it not clear to those who inherit the earth after 
the peoples before them were destroyed because of 
their sins - a people that they do not learn from, but 
actually copy in behaviour - that if Allah wanted to 
overcome them for their disobedience He would do so, as He often does, sealing their hearts so that they do not listen to 
the lesson and are not benefitted by being reminding of such a warning? 

||S) These previous nations, of the peoples of Noah, Hud, Salih, Lot and Shu’ayb-1 relate their narrative to you O Mes¬ 
senger, concerning their rejection of the truth and their stubbornness, and the destruction that befell them, to serve as an 
example for those who reflect, and a warning for those who take advice. Messengers came to the people of these cities 
with clear signs of the truth of what they brought, but Allah did not guide them to the truth because of their rejection of 
it the first time, a just recompense for their rejection despite seeing the clear signs and proofs. In the same way that Allah 
closed the hearts of the peoples of these cities who rejected their prophets, Allah closes the hearts of those who reject 
Muhammad (blessings and peace be upon him), so that they are not guided to faith. In the same way that Allah sealed the 
hearts of the peoples of these towns which rejected their prophets, Allah seals the hearts of those who reject Muhammad, 
blessings and peace be upon him, so that they are not guided to faith. 

Jj| Allah did not find most of the peoples who were sent messengers to be firm and constant in what He commanded - 
most of them rebelling against Him. 

(Jfl Then Allah sent the Prophet Moses (peace be upon him), after these messengers, to Pharaoh and his people with clear 
miracles showing the truth of what he came with. Yet they only rejected these miracles and disbelieved them. So reflect 
on what the end of Pharaoh and his people was as a result of their rejection: Allah destroyed them by drowning them, 
condemning them in this world and in the Afterlife. 

And Moses said when Allah sent him to Pharaoh: ‘O Pharaoh! I have been sent from the Creator of all creation, the 
Owner and Sustainer of everything.’ 

Beneficial Points: 

1. The strong link between the abundance of provision and Mindfulness, and if Allah give blessings to the disbelievers 
this is a way of leading them on and deluding them. 2. There is no security from the sudden punishment of Allah which 
could come at any hour of the night or day. 3. The Qur’an tells the stories of the people who came before to strengthen 
the believers and caution the disbelievers. 4. Causing corruption on earth is one of the worst crimes, and the punishment 
for those who corrupt things is strong, as was the case with Pharaoh. 


0 \ il) sS ist 





















^ ^ J^-W Jp 3 j^~Sj i^i&Sy^’ 


0 jiX^S\ 05o^^ 5 (jU%o\S^\I^oL: 

xiA i *j \ ^ ^ j »p>3 ^)L<J \ 

Lj^i\j\il!^ i ]J===^j\ <J2j^>-^ o\ Joj5 (v?) jLip 

j^_$ \ j> (^) t * a^A \ ^_s ^ aj>^\ VjJ \S (^£) 

b?i3 t^D 

6 Is ^_;a6 ^ 

l£^S \ \JjL$\y^ iy£-b 

O 0 s<j& 

O^S\Aa 0Lfl\S ii UzzP ^ \ o'' L^l^PtS^S * 





@ Moses said: ‘Since I have been sent from Allah 
it is only appropriate for me to say the truth about 
Him. I have brought you a clear proof showing the 
truth of what I say, proving that I am sent from Al¬ 
lah to you. Release the Children of Israel from the 
slavery and miserable treatment they have suffered 
and let them leave with me.’ 

HI Pharaoh said: ‘If you have brought a sign, as 
you claim, then show it to me, if you are telling 
the truth. 

© So Moses threw his stick and it changed into a 
great snake, clear for all to see. 

(Jfl Then he drew out his hand from his shirt, near 
to his chest or under his arm, and it appeared com¬ 
pletely white, not because of illness, but radiating 
brilliantly to all who saw it because of its extreme 
whiteness. 

(jf| The notables and leaders said once they wit¬ 
nessed the transformation of the stick and the 
whiteness of his hand: ‘Moses is nothing but a 
skilled and masterful magician.’ 

© ‘He intends by this to drive you all out from 
Egypt through his magic.’ So Pharaoh asked his 
chiefs what they advise him to do. 

© They said: ‘Delay their case, Moses and his 
brother Aaron, and send people to the cities of 
Egypt to call all the magicians.’ 

© ‘They will bring to you every skillful and pow¬ 
erful magician.’ 

© So Pharaoh sent people to call the magicians, 
and when they came to Pharaoh they asked him if 
they would have a reward if they were the winners 
and overcame Moses with their magic. 

© Pharaoh replied: ‘Yes Indeed! You will be given a reward and you would be brought near to me and of those given 
important positions.’ 

© Due to their pride, they were certain that they would win against Moses. They asked him: ‘Choose O Moses if you 
want to be the first to throw, or if you want us to throw first.’ 

© Trusting in Allah that he would overcome them, Moses was not worried about them. He told them to throw their ropes 
and sticks. When they threw them they cast a mighty spell over the eyes of the people watching the spectacle, so that 
things looked different to reality, and the people became awed and frightened. 

© Allah then inspired Prophet Moses (peace be upon him): ‘Throw your stick O Moses!’ So he threw it and the stick 
changed into a snake and swallowed the ropes and sticks the magicians were using instead of real snakes; destroying for 
the people the illusion that these were crawling snakes. 

© In this way the truth became clear: proving the truth of what Moses was saying, and showing the falsehood of what 
the magicians had done. 

© The magicians were defeated and humiliated by Moses in the assembly. 

© When the magicians saw the greatness of the power of Allah, and his clear signs, they could only fall down, prostrating 
to Him. 

Beneficial Points: 

1. From Allah’s wisdom and mercy He made the miracle of each prophet of the kind that was predominant among the 
people of that time, so when magic was predominant among the people of the time of Moses, peace be upon him, his 
miracle was similar to magic, although it was different to magic in its reality. 

2. Pharaoh was a lowly, humble, helpless servant, or he would not have needed to turn to the magicians to try and protect 
himself from Moses. 

3. The prostrating of the magicians to Allah and their faith in Him, glory be to Him, is a proof of the profound effect of 
faith in the souls of humankind. 





Al-A‘raf 


i64 






















no 



^L^«- S^jS, 

J^rh ;j£s 4 ^^0 

Jj/L^jAS <£/\TijjS5^-123 GJ obl^jlua^ ft 0^ 1 I 

1 0 ^jjj^ ^y^ij jJz'Xli) 

1 


<0 The magicians exclaimed: ‘We believe in the 
Lord of all of creation.’ 

<HI He is the Lord of Moses and Aaron (peace be 
upon them), alone worthy of worship for all people, 
and the false Allahs are not worthy of worship. 

||| Pharaoh said threatening them because of their 
faith in Allah: ‘Do you believe in Allah before I 
have given you permission to do so. This is only 
a trick you were deceiving people with, and a plot 
that you and Moses have planned to drive out the 
people of the city. But soon you will know what 
the consequences are and what an example I will 
make of you!’ 

HI ‘I will cut off the right hand and left foot or the 
left hand and right foot of each of you, and would 
then crucify you on palm trunks, making an exam¬ 
ple of you to frighten whoever sees you.’ 

|I| The magicians replied: ‘Indeed we will return 
to our Lord alone, so we are not scared of what you 
threaten us with.’ 

HI ‘You are only finding fault in us because we had 
faith in the signs of our Lord when they came to us 
through Moses. If this is our crime, then we stand 
firmly by it.’ Then they turned to Allah in prayer: 
‘O our Lord! Pour upon us patience so that we will 
be able to stand firmly for the truth and let us die 
in a state of surrendering in devotion to You, doing 
as You command, and following Your Messenger.’ 
|IJ The leaders and notables people among Phar¬ 
aoh’s people urged Pharaoh, provoking him to act 
against Moses and the believers who were with 
him. They said: ‘Will you leave Moses and his peo¬ 
ple to spread corruption in the land, abandoning 
you and your Allahs, and calling to the worship of Allah alone?’ Pharaoh said: ‘We will kill the sons of the Children of 
Israel, and let their women live to serve us, and we have complete power over them.’ 

IP Moses advised his people: ‘O people, ask for the help of Allah alone to remove hardship from you and to bring good, 
and be patient with the trial we have being given. For indeed the earth belongs to Allah alone, and it does not belong 
to Pharaoh or anyone else to do as they please in it. Rather, Allah, according to His will, gives turns to different people 
to have authority in the land, but the good end on earth is for those who have faith, follow the commands of their Lord 
and stay away from what He has prohibited - they will achieve the good end despite the tests and trials they are given.’ 
IP The Children of Israel said to Moses (peace be upon him): ‘We suffered at the hands of Pharaoh before you came to us 
and after you have come, with Pharaoh killing our sons and letting our women live.’ Moses (peace be upon him) advised 
them giving them hope of release from their trial: ‘It may be that Allah might destroy your enemy, Pharaoh and his peo¬ 
ple, and establish you on the earth after them, seeing whether you behave with thankfulness or ingratitude.’ 

Ip And indeed I gave the people of Pharaoh a number of years of drought and famine, testing them with a shortage of 
fruits and crops, so that they might reflect and realise that this was a punishment from Allah because of their disbelief, 
and so they might repent to Him. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The position of the magicians and the courageous and direct announcement of their faith shows that people, stripped of 
their own desire, submitting to reason and sound thought, rush to faith when the proofs appear to them. 

2. The people who have faith in Allah and the last day are those with the strongest resolve among people, and the bravest 
and most patient in times of crises, trials, and conflict. 

3. Those who benefit from power instigate and stir up power to face the people of faith, because in the continuation of 
their power lies the continuation of their best interests. 

4. Wrongdoing and corruption are some of the reasons for the withholding of rain and the rise of high prices. 


^ ^ ^ ^ J 

0 


Al-A‘raf 


















m 




! ($) 0j^- 



^ji^J JJL- ii \3 \3 oV_3^ ^ 

| <*^£$!yV^l£2 

\Xj ?jy^£\ j^Ci£) V^r^ ($) E 



Whenever the people of Pharaoh experienced 
wealth, healthy yields, and a thriving economy, 
they said: ‘We have been given this because we 
deserve it.’ But if a misfortune came upon them, 
such as a drought or famine, diseases, and other 
hardships, they would blame their bad fortune on 
Moses and the Children of Israel who were with 
him. However, the misfortunes happened to them 
by the decree and permission of Allah, and neither 
they nor Moses (peace be upon him) had any part in 
the affair, apart from Moses’s supplications against 
them. But most of them do not know, saying what 
happens is due to other things, rather than Allah’s 
decree. 

HI The people of Pharaoh said to Moses (peace be 
upon them), out of their stubbornness against the 
truth: ‘Whatever sign or evidence you bring to us 
and whatever proof of the falsehood of own beliefs 
you show us, we will not believe you. ‘ 

HJ As a punishment for their rejection and stub¬ 
bornness, I sent floods of water that destroyed their 
crops and fruits; locusts and weevils that ate their 
crops and harvests;frogs which filled their dishes 
and containers, ruining their food, and disturbing 
their sleep; and turning the water in their wells 
and rivers into blood. All these were sent as clear 
and distinct signs, one after another. Despite all of 
these torments, they were too proud to have faith in 
Allah or to believe in what Moses (peace be upon 
him) brought. They were a people who committed 
wrongs, who would not give up falsehood, and 
would not be guided to the truth. 

|1| When these torments came upon them, they 
asked Moses (peace be upon him): ‘O Moses, call upon your Lord, because of what He has given you of prophethood and 
Allah’s promise to you that He will remove the torment for our turning to Him, to remove from us the torment, for then 
we will certainly believe in you, and will send the Children of Israel with you, releasing them from captivity.’ 

(jl| But when Allah removed the torment from them for a set time - before they were destroyed through drowning - they 
went back on their word and did not believe him or send the Israelites with him, remaining firm on their disbelief, and 
not allowing the Israelites to go with Moses (peace be upon him). 

|I| So when the appointed time came for their destruction, I unleashed My punishment on them and drowned them in the 
sea because of their rejection of the signs of Allah and because they turned away from the truth about which there was 
no doubt. 

@ I made the Children of Israel, who had been humiliated by Pharaoh and his people, inherit the eastern areas of the land 
and the western areas of it (the lands of the Levant). Allah blessed this land, making it produce the best crops and fruits. 
So the good word of your Lord was fulfilled O Messenger. 

where Allah says, ‘I wished to favour those who were weak in the earth, and to make them leaders and inheritors’ (Surat 
al-Qasas: 5). So Allah established them in the land because of their patience in the face of the harm they had suffered 
from Pharaoh and his people, and Allah destroyed the agriculture and buildings of Pharaoh, and the palaces they had 
constructed. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Good and evil are all by the Divine will and decree of Allah, and nothing is independent of this. 2. The condition of 
people in times of trial and misfortune is to seek refuge in Allah alone, driven by their natural inclination to Monotheism. 
3. The believer should consider the signs of Allah and His standard practice in dealing with His creation, thinking about 
their purposes and outcomes. 4. The power of individuals and nations vanish before the great power of Allah, and faith 
in Allah is the source of all power. 5. Allah rewards His believing servants who are patient by giving them strength in 
the land after they were considered to be weak. 6. Allah destroys tyrants, no matter how great their power or how long 
their time in power. 




Al-A‘raf 




















\-*-£= \\j} ^y~»s>S i^j^iJ\^ \s ~$f' 

3ci Cj\0C) >j9 JLL=^j\^ 

*jjl 4? ($) oyk^ ^ k^^== = ^ aS> k A -3 ^ \.j^~z-^ 

^|| c*jkk _ 

•Jjjl ■’«*^o_ > ^==i3'j) ijlj«-\jli.O 4->oL^J 3 «-lS3\ 


M+i 



JJOe 


Or==^J cg-iPc) 3 ^ \k>-&\ Ob^ 4^ ^ Aj 


(jp And I made the Children of Israel cross the 
sea when Moses hit it with his stick and it parted. 
They passed a people who were worshipping idols, 
which they worshipped instead of Allah. The Chil¬ 
dren of Israel said to Moses (peace be upon him): 
‘O Moses, make us an idol to worship as these peo¬ 
ple have idols to worship.’ Moses said: ‘You are a 
people who are ignorant of the rights that are due to 
Allah alone concerning the belief in His Oneness 
and what is due to Him of reverence, and what is 
inappropriate to ascribe to Him of polytheism and 
the like.’ 

HI ‘These people who are worshipping idols are 
ruined, and all of their works and devotion is false 
and worthless because they are worshipping other 
than Allah.’ 

(jf| Moses said: ‘How can I seek for you a Allah 
other than the one true Allah for you to worship, 
when you have already seen His great signs, and 


Al-A‘raf 


167 


(J\£? siiS ^i>j3 

^ ^ ^ 9 ) , ^ when He has preferred you over all the nations of 

your time, granting you the destruction of your en- 
v ^ emy, and making you leaders in the land and estab¬ 

lishing you in it?’ 

@ And remember O Children of Israel, when I 
saved you from the humiliation of Pharaoh and his 
people, who were making you suffer greatly, kill¬ 
ing your sons and letting your women live to serve 
them. Being saved from Pharaoh and his people 
was a great test from your Lord, to see if you would 
be thankful. 

@ And Allah appointed for Moses a place of meet¬ 
ing of thirty nights in order to speak with him, and 
then He perfected it by adding ten more, so that 
there were forty nights all together. Moses told his brother Aaron, when he was leaving for this retreat alone with His 
Lord: ‘O Aaron, take my place as leader among my people, and do what is right, governing them wisely and treating 
them kindly, and not following the path of those who cause corruption, nor committing disobedience, nor helping the 
wrongdoers.’ 

|fj) When Moses came to meet his Lord for the appointment he had been assigned, which was a full forty nights, and his 
Lord spoke to him giving him instructions and prohibitions and so on, Moses desired to see his Lord, so he asked to see 
Him. Allah the Exalted replied: ‘You will not see Me in the life of this world, because you will not be able to endure that, 
but look instead at the mountain when I reveal Myself to it, if it remains in its place and is not affected then You will be 
able to see Me; but if it becomes flattened, then you will not be able to see Me in the life of this world.’ Then when Allah 
revealed Himself to the mountain it crumbled to dust, and Moses fell down unconscious. When he recovered from his 
unconsciousness, he said: ‘I declare Your Perfection O Lord, and that You are far above any deficiency being ascribed to 
You, and I turn to You asking for forgiveness for having asked to see You in this world, and I am the first of my people 
to believe.’ 

Beneficial Points: 

1. The events show that the Israelites moved from one error to another despite Moses, the prophet of Allah, being among 
them. 

2. One sign of a people being forsaken by Allah is when they see evil as good, and see what is good as evil and incorrect, 
due to their false opinions and whims. 

3. The rectification of people and closing the doors of corruption and evil are amongst the lofty aims of the prophets and 
those who invite to the truth. 

4. It is Allah’s decree that no one from among His creation is to see Him in this world, and He will honour whomever He 
loves of His servants with seeing Him in the Afterlife. 





















Ll^C^==3j (^) (‘ h^>^===Llli \ ^V 5 r $j cjXsL^S- V^ Jj>r 3 

j$^J jfp 

I ^oj}L^ 3vi?-lj c£L^^i\j s jjd\jc> j3*£ ^IsP^ ^ 


-? 






riOk^l 


L^blLJ^==s ^uiV 3 (Jn) ^<j^ji^ L^Lp\^ 5 l^ 3P I 

^^^V5JS^J^i4i^ 3j^f WX^J 






{^) ®j3jd 

u^i ^ l_3 VL$? j 3 jL^\ tl^ii wj 



@ Allah told Moses: ‘O Moses, I have chosen you 
and preferred you over other people through the 
message which I have sent you with, and by My 
speaking to you directly. Take then the great honour 
which I have given you, and be among those who 
are thankful to Allah for such a great gift.’ 

HI Allah wrote for Moses in the Tablets everything 
that the Israelites would need for their spiritual and 
worldly affairs - instruction for those who would 
be instructed and an explanation of laws that need¬ 
ed explanation. He told Moses to take hold of them 
firmly and with determination, and to instruct his 
people, the Israelites, to take hold of the most ex¬ 
cellent instructions that they contained, with the 
promise of the greatest reward for doing what they 
were instructed in the most perfect way, and to do 
so with patience and forgiveness. Allah told Moses 
that He would show them the destiny of those who 
went against His commands and who disobeyed 
Him, and the ruin and loss that they would receive 
as a result. 

HI Those who are unjustly proud towards the serv¬ 
ants of Allah and the truth will be turned away by 
Allah from thinking about His signs on the horizons 
and within themselves and from understanding His 
verses even if they see every sign, they will not 
believe in them, because of their rejection of these 
signs and their turning away from them, and for 
opposing Allah and His Messenger. If they see the 
path of truth which leads to the pleasure of Allah, 
they do not follow it, and do not like it; and if they 
see the way of misguidance and error leading to Al¬ 
lah’s displeasure, they follow it. This only happens 
to them because they rejected the great signs and verses of Allah proving the truth of what the messengers came with, and 
did not pay any attention to them. 

HI Those who rejected the signs of Allah proving the truth of the messengers, and denied that they would meet with Allah 
on the Day of Judgement, their good actions will come to nothing, because they were not based on faith; and they will 
be repaid for their disbelief in Allah and for associating partners with Allah - the repayment for which is living eternally 
in the fire of Hell. 

|f| After Moses had gone to meet with his Lord, his people took to worshipping a statue of a calf made from their orna¬ 
ments, not possessing any soul, but which made a sound. Did they not know that this calf could not speak to them or guide 
them to any good way, material or spiritual, and that it could not bring anything of benefit to them or remove anything 
harmful from them? But they took to worshipping it and wronged themselves by doing so. 

HI When they regretted their actions and did not know how to make-up for their wrongdoing, realising that they had 
gone astray from the straight path by worshipping the calf besides to Allah, they said: ‘If our Lord does not have mercy 
on us, by enabling us to do as He instructed, and if He does not forgive us for having worshipped the calf, then we would 
certainly be among the losers in the life of this world and in the Afterlife.’ 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. From being grateful is that the servant should show the grace and blessings of Allah upon him, and thankfulness will 
cause an increase in blessings. 2. The servant should always strive to reach excellence as regards to his speech and ac¬ 
tions. 3. It is necessary to accept the sacred law with determination and seriousness and to resolve to follow and carry 
out what is transmitted in it, in terms of righteousness and putting things right and preventing corruption and perversion. 
4. A nation will be revered and strong as long as it holds fast to its sacred way of life, otherwise it will fall apart and lose 
its strength. 5. You reap what you sow, so whoever has faith and does good deeds, for them is Paradise, and whoever 
disbelieves and does bad deeds, for them is the fire. 6. If the servant makes a mistake or falls short with regards to His 
Lord’s rights, he must acknowledge the enormity of the crime he committed, and that there is no refuge from Allah’s 
chastisement except through Him. 





















^^Uer-Slj t SS I 


\j& 


&c3Ls~j e|Ue-SVj (JJac-i iIj; j\5 (j£) 

>o\3^t3&4-2> 


;i> * 




J J 


(jp Moses returned to his people from his meeting 
with His Lord full of anger and sadness upon find¬ 
ing them worshipping the calf. He said: ‘What an 
evil condition you have fallen into after me O peo¬ 
ple, which leads only to ruin and misery! Were you 
tired of waiting for the appointed time of your Lord 
assigned for me - the forty nights - so you started 
to worship the calf! ’ Moses threw the Tablets down 
because of his extreme anger and sadness, and 
took his brother Aaron by the head and beard and 
dragged him, because he had been with them and 
had not been able to stop them from worshipping 
the calf. Aaron said to his brother Moses: ‘O son of 
my mother, indeed the people considered me to be 
weak, not respecting me, and they had almost killed 
me; so do not punish me in a way that would make 
my enemies rejoice, and do not to include me out of 
your anger among the people who had done wrong 
by worshipping other than Allah.’ 

@ Moses said supplicating to his Lord: ‘O Lord, 
forgive me and me brother Aaron, and enter us into 
Your Mercy, surrounding us with it, for You are to 
us the most Merciful of those who have mercy.’ 

(J1J Without doubt, those who worshipped the calf 
will receive their Lord’s anger, and will have hu¬ 
miliation in this life, for displeasing their Lord and 
not acting according to His Command. That is how 
Allah rewards those who invent lies about Allah. 
|I| Those who do wrong by associating others with 
Allah and committing sins, and then repent out of 
sincere faith, repenting from polytheism to having 
faith in Him alone, and repenting from disobedi¬ 
ence to doing good actions, giving up all kinds of 
sins whilst seeking His forgiveness-Allah will be forgiving and merciful to them, erasing and overlooking what they have 
done. 

|I| When the anger of Moses (peace be upon him) had subsided and he calmed down, he picked up the Tablets, which he 
had thrown down in anger. These Tablets contained guidance and an explanation of the truth; a mercy for those who stand 
in fear of their Lord, and are mindful of His consequences. 

(jf| Moses chose seventy of the best men among his people to ask for forgiveness for what the foolish among them had 
done in worshipping the calf. Allah appointed a time and place for them, though when they reached there they became 
bold and asked Moses to let them see Allah with their eyes. So an earthquake seized them, and they were struck down 
and killed by the strength of it. So Moses begged his Lord, saying: ‘O Lord, if You had willed to destroy them and myself 
before they had come to You, You could have done so. Would You destroy us because of what the foolish amongst us have 
done. What my people have done in worshipping the calf, was only a trial and test by which You led astray whom You 
willed, and guided whom you willed. You are our Protector, so forgive us our sins, and have mercy on us, for You are the 
best of those who forgive and overlook.’ 

Beneficial Points: 

1. A Muslim should become angry for the sake of Allah and not for himself, disturbed when he sees Allah’s commands 
being violated. 2. In the verses is proof that a mistake in making an independent judgement in spite of the clarity of the 
evidence, is not forgiven for the person who makes it when passing judgement on him, an the jurists would call this type 
of independent judgement a far-fetched interpretation. 3. It is from the etiquette of making a prayer to begin with oneself, 
since Moses, peace be upon him, began his prayer by asking for forgiveness for himself, out of respect towards Allah 
concerning the anger he demonstrated, then he asked for forgiveness for his brother for any negligence or carelessness he 
had shown in preventing people from worshipping the calf. 4. All lying is evil, and the dignity of whoever does it falls 
in front of people. 5. In the verses is the awakening of the desire for wrongdoers to turn to Allah, asking for forgiveness, 
and the prohibition of despairing of the mercy of Allah, even if their sins are great. 6. It is necessary to avoid Allah’s 
anger, and to fear His might. Consider the position of Moses (peace be upon him) with His Lord, and then consider his 
fear of His Lord’s anger. 




















\V 




^a. ^ 


^->i 


^jyj^j&l^Xtrt 


AX* 





<|p ‘ And make us among those You have favoured 
with Your blessings and well-being, enabling us 
to do good works. And make us from among Your 
righteous servants for whom You have prepared 
Paradise. Indeed we turn to You in repentance, ad¬ 
mitting our mistakes.’ 

Allah said: 'I give My punishment to whom I will; 
those who do the actions leading to misery, and My 
Mercy surrounds all things in this world. There is 
no created being or object that My Mercy has not 
reached, immersed in My Grace and Kindness. 

I will decree My Mercy in the Afterlife for those 
who are mindful of Me, following what I instruct 
and staying away from what I have prohibited, giv¬ 
ing charity from their wealth as they have been or¬ 
dered, and who have faith in My signs.’ 

Ip The ones just described are those who follow 
Muhammad (peace be upon him), the illiterate 
prophet who cannot read or write, and who is only 
inspired by His Lord. The name and description of 
the Prophet and what is revealed to him is to be 
found in the Torah, revealed to Moses (peace be 
upon him), and the Gospel, revealed to Jesus (peace 
be upon him). Muhammad instructed people to that 
which is good and right, and forbade those things 
that sound minds, those with a sound nature, know 
to be bad: allowing them the good food and drink 
and relationships which are not harmful, and mak¬ 
ing unlawful those things which are bad. He also 
removed the difficult commandments revealed as 
obligations to previous communities, such as hav¬ 
ing to kill the one who killed someone else acci- 
dentaly. Those who believed in him from among 
the Israelites and others, respecting and honouring him and helping him against the disbelievers who were his enemies, 
following the Qur’an which was revealed to him, they are the successful ones who will attain what they desire and attain 
safety from what they fear. 

(jf| Allah tells the Prophet (peace be upon him) to inform people that he is the messenger of Allah to them all, both Arabs 
and non-Arabs. 

Allah alone controls the heavens and the earth. There is nothing worthy of worship other than Him, glory be to Him. He 
brings the dead to life, and causes what is alive to die. People should have faith in Allah and in Muhammad (peace be 
upon him), the Prophet, His Messenger, who cannot read or write, and who came only with what His Lord revealed to 
him, in order to guide them to what is good for them in this world and in the Afterlife. 

Having mentioned how some of the Israelites had worshipped the calf, Allah mentions that there is a nation of the Israel¬ 
ites who are not like those who worshipped the calf: 

(jl| There is a group from the people of Moses amongst the Israelites who stand for the truth, and guide people to it, and 
who are just in their rulings between people through it. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The mercy of Allah surrounds all things, but the mercy of Allah for His servants varies and increases according to the 
level of their faith and good actions. 

2. From the Justice of Allah and the just nature of the narrative in the Qur’an, is Allah’s fairness in mentioning the at¬ 
tributes of a nation or a people. Since He mentions the blameworthy attributes of some of the Children of Israel, a reader 
may assume that these attributes were general and true for all of them. Therefore, Allah mentions that among them was a 
group who were upright, guided, and guiding others. 

3. The Torah and the Gospels contained clear proofs that the Prophet Muhammad, peace and blessings be upon him, 
would be sent and attesting to the truth of what he came with. 

4. A prayer can be general or particular, according to circumstances. Moses was general in his prayer in the situation 
mentioned above. 


oXXt \X===X 

yXX&jX==C* Xj ^ Csr^ \yXX 

X-XX jX _^===cX gC. 

" — Ji-Xs 

\ ^ _ j ^ j x* 























,d\yj»s\5 




(j| Allah divided the Israelites into twelve tribes. 
Then, when his people were asking him to call upon 
Allah to give them water, He inspired Moses to hit 
the stone with his stick. Moses hit it and twelve 
springs gushed out of it, which was the same num¬ 
ber as the number of tribes. Each of the tribes knew 
which one was their own drinking place, which 
none of the other tribes shared with them. Allah 
shaded them with clouds which followed them 
where they moved and stopped with them. He also 
sent them manna, which was similar like gum with 
a sweet taste, and quails, or a bird similar to quails, 
and told them to eat of the good things He had pro¬ 
vided for them. They did not wrong Allah through 
their disobedience and ingratitude for the blessings 
they were given, not appreciating them as they 
should have been, but they wronged themselves, 
bringing themselves to ruin through going against 
the commands of Allah and not acknowledging His 
blessings to them. 

(jf| Remember, O Messenger, when Allah told the 
Israelites to enter Jerusalem, and to eat from any 
of the fruits of the town, whenever they wished, 
and to ask Allah to remove their disobedience from 
them. He told them to enter the gate in humility, 
and that He would forgive them for their mistakes 
and would increase those who do good in the good 
things of this world and of the Afterlife. 

HI But the wrongdoers among them changed the 
words they were told to say, and said 4 A grain in a 
rite’, instead of asking for forgiveness, as they had 
been instructed to; and they changed what they had 
been told to do by entering whilst dragging them¬ 
selves on their rears, rather than entering in humility to Allah, lowering their heads. So Allah sent them a punishment from 
the heaven because of their disobedience. 

(jp Ask the Jews about how Allah punished some of the Israelites. Remind them of the story of the town which was near 
to the sea where they used to overstep the limits of Allah: fishing on the Sabbath after they had been forbidden from doing 
so. Allah tested them by making the fish come to them so that they could see them clearly on the surface of the sea on 
Saturday, and then making them disappear from view during the rest of the week. Allah gave them this trial because of 
their disobedience and wrongdoing. So eventually they decided to fish by setting up their nets thereby using a trick, so 
that the fish would fall into them on Saturday and they could take them and eat them on Sunday. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Rejection and disbelief are reasons for the removal of blessings. 

2. Among the reasons for a the arrival of consequences and the sending down of a punishment is the use of tricks to get 
around sacred law, because this is wrongdoing and overstepping the limits set by Allah. 

3. Allah decreed humiliation and poverty for the wrongdoers, and that He would, due to their disobedience and deviation, 
send people to punish them until the day of Resurrection. 




Al-A‘raf 


171 
















0 £Sj &\lj±ZAj ^ \ Jo A^j Cj\Ic. 

• J cu^r^ 1 .fjAA^VX-^^2T^j \ 

(Jj°) )jp^ 



jU^JIM&& 

| cf0^ S 

^^-#====^^ ^fjaL=-^-5 ^S-^ (lr 5 c_jA^i (^) 03^—5^^ 

J c3 W ^ \ JX^Cj 






0^====L-1 


@ Mention, O Messenger, when a group among 
them forbade them from doing what was wrong, 
cautioning them against it. Another group re¬ 
marked: ‘Why are you advising those whom Allah 
is going to destroy in this world because of their 
disobedience, or punish with a firm punishment on 
the Day of Judgement?’ Those advising replied: 

‘This advising of ours is to be free from blame 
before Allah, through doing what He commanded 
us to do of instructing what is right and forbidding 
what is wrong, so that He would not take us to 
account for not doing so; and, perhaps, those we 
advise might benefit from the advice, and give up 
their disobedience.’ 

(jf| When the wrongdoers turned away from what 
those who advised them had reminded them of, and 
they would not give up their disobedience, Allah 
saved the group which had forbidden disobedience 
from the punishment, and afflicted those who trans¬ 
gressed the limits by fishing on the Saturday with a 
firm punishment, because they were not obedient to 
Allah and persisted in their rebellion. 

|f| When they overstepped the limits, rebelling 
against Allah out of pride and stubbornness, and 
they would not be advised, Allah told them: ‘O you 
disobedient ones! Be you monkeys, humiliated!’ 

So they became what He willed, because when He 
wills something He only says to it ‘Be!’ and it is. 

(Jfl Mention, O Messenger, when Allah declared in 
clear terms that He would put over the Jews those 
who would humiliate and humble them in this life 
until the Day of Judgement. Your Lord is quick 
with the punishment for those who go against Him, 
sometimes punishing them in the worldly life. Yet He is Forgiving to whoever repents to Him from among His servants, 
and is Merciful to them. 

(jl| And I broke and separated them up in the earth, dividing them into communities, after they had been united. Among 
them were those who were righteous and who upheld the rights of Allah and the rights of His creatures; among them were 
those who were moderate; and among them were those who were excessive in their disobedience. Allah tested them with 
ease and difficulty, so that they might return from what they were doing. 

(jf| Then an evil people followed after these people, receiving the Torah from those who came before them. They read 
it but did not act according to what was in it, taking the miserable goods of this life as a bribe to distort the scripture of 
Allah; and they gave judgements which were not according to what was revealed in the scripture, convincing themselves 
that Allah would forgive them their sins. If some petty worldly gain should come their way, they would take it every time. 
Did Allah not make promises and contracts with these people that they would not say anything about Allah except the 
truth, without distorting or changing anything? Their failure to act according to what was in the scripture was not due to 
ignorance, but was in full knowledge, because they had studied what was in the scripture and knew it, which meant that 
their disobedience was greater. Yet the home of the Afterlife and its eternal bliss is far better than any passing gain that 
they may have been given as a bribe. It is for those who are Mindful, following what He instructs and staying away from 
what He has prohibited. Do those who take these insignificant goods not understand that what Allah has prepared for 
those who are mindful in the Afterlife is far better and more lasting? 

|§| Those who hold tightly to the scripture and act according to it, establishing the prayer as it should be established and 
in its set times, Allah will reward their actions - Allah does not allow the reward of those who act well to be lost. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. If the punishment of Allah descends upon a people because of their sins, Allah saves those from them who instruct 
people to do right and tell them not to do wrong. 2. One should be careful of the punishment of Allah, since it could be 
terrible in this world, as was the case when Allah, glory be to Him changed a group of the Israelites into monkeys because 
of their rebellion. 3. The bliss of this world, no matter how great it may seem, is little and trivial next to the eternal bliss 
of the Hereafter. 4. The best action after having faith is to establish the prayer, because it is the basis of the Religion. 





















W 


felt: 

: " m 

C^? -Al^ —=^ Vts\^ \ 

£>* ajl 3 i \zJ===j £ 

^jl^05j^^Ui 

^cL^ \i ltjtj\p a!uo\^ 1$ ^ \ <Jo\j 0 C^Jx^z/i 

jAiS^ ^ ^ 

il==J}3j\ <L^£ a3& o\,^J^==^ \ 

I2lb\2^1y. a^=== 3 oi^ 

I Oi^JJ^ \ Sfe *T^ 0 5j>i 


j^l3\*jil @) Mention, O Muhammad, when Allah raised the 

mountain above the Israelites when they refused to 
accept what was in the Torah. Then the mountain 
became like a cloud, casting a shadow over them, 
and they were sure it would fall upon them. They 
were told to firmly and seriously hold onto what 
Allah had revealed to them, and to remember the 
rulings that He had made law for them, and not to 
forget this, so that they might be Mindful. 

HI Mention, O Muhammad, when your Lord took 
from the loins of the children of Adam their descend¬ 
ants and had them acknowledge, bearing witness to 
His lordship, making it part of their innate nature to 
acknowledge that He created them and that He is 
their Lord. He said to them, ‘Am I not your Lord?’ 
and they replied, ‘Yes, we bear witness’. Allah said: 
‘I asked you this question so that you would not 
deny the proofs of Allah on the Day of Judgement, 
saying that you did not have any knowledge of it. 
@ ‘Lest you might say that your ancestors were the 
ones who broke the promise, taking others as part¬ 
ners with Allah, and that you were just following 
them. In this way, you would say: ‘O our Lord! Will 
You destroy us for what our ancestors did, making 
our actions worthless because of taking others as 
partners with You?! Indeed we carry no sin because 
we were just following our ancestors and had no 
knowledge.’ @ So just as I made clear the signs 
and evidences for the previous nations, I make clear 
the lessons for these people (Quraish) so that they 
might repent from worshiping others as partners 
with Allah to believing in Him alone and worship¬ 
ping Him alone, as they had agreed aforetime be¬ 
fore they broke their promise. (Jp Recite to the Israelites the news of the man from among them who Allah gave His signs 
to, so that he knew and understood the truth which they directed him to. But he did not act according to them, leaving 
them and removing himself away from them, so that Satan became his close companion, and he became one of those who 
go astray and are ruined, after he had been one of those who were rightly-guided and on the path to being saved. @ If 
Allah had desired, He would have made this person benefit through these signs, enabling him to act according to them, 
so that he would be raised up in this world and in the next. But he chose what led to his failure, being attracted to the 
desires of the worldly life, and preferring them to the Afterlife. His example in his extreme greed for this world is like the 
example of a dog, which pants with its tongue constantly, whether it is resting or whether it is chased away. This example 
is the example of the people who are astray because of rejecting Allah’s signs. So relate the stories to them O Messenger 
so that they may think and reject their denial of the truth and their misguidance. @ Is there anything worse than a people 
who reject Allah’s signs and proofs, not believing them, wronging themselves through doing so and only gaining their 
own ruin. ||| Whoever Allah allows to be guided to the right path is truly guided, because they chose the path of their 
Lord; and whoever Allah does not lead to His path, sending them away from it because of their deviation and bad actions, 
those are the true losers, who lose themselves and their families on the Day of Judgment - is that not complete loss? 

® Beneficial Points: 1. The aim of revealing the divine texts is for people to act according to them, not just to recite 
them, as this is a form of neglecting them. 2. Allah created the innate ability to understand the signs of the Oneness of 
Allah in people, from the time they were formed; if their nature is sound and not corrupted, they will recognise these 
signs, and act accordingly. 3. In the verses is a lesson for those who have been given success in acting according to the 
verses of the Qur’an: that they should know the grace of Allah upon them in enabling them to act according to them, 
and that they should purify themselves. 4. The necessity of reflecting upon and learning from the stories of the Qur’an, 
because they are the stories of truth. 5. In the verses is the encouragement to act according to knowledge, through which 
Allah raises people up, and through which they are protected from Satan; and a cautioning against not acting according 
to knowledge. 6. Muslims are encouraged to repent to Allah, asking for guidance from Him, and protection from the 
dangers of misguidance. 






















i JJaJs 


(wj) O^LiliJ \ <i\g23}\ 

^ Wi^pSls ( ^Z^ ikLZf'j 1 

(j£) ojj^L^ 

r) X*-ZS^-^> V^jUj \^> J^ss» ^yji \j (nm) OjJ aSo ^oj 

j j)j^ ($> 6 ^ L$ ($) O^Jo^JL^>* 
0 O^^ki ^ l_>* 01 oiV^O l^ 

Oj j^^KcX ^jy^\ j 3 Oy^o^ Lyt 

jjj c5$Lto^ 4j^\ JsL^4 O^ ($) © -X*) 


@ And I made for the Hellfire, many people from 
Humankind and the Jinn, because of My Knowl¬ 
edge that they would do the actions of the people 
of Hell. They have hearts by which they do not un¬ 
derstand what will benefit them and what will harm 
them; eyes which they do not use to see the signs 
of Allah within themselves and upon the horizons, 
so that they can learn from them; and they have 
ears which they do not use to listen to the verses 
of Allah, so that they might reflect over them. Such 
people resemble cattle in their lack of sense - rath¬ 
er, they are even more astray. They are oblivious to 
faith in Allah and the Last day. 

HI To Allah, glory be to Him, belongs the most 
beautiful names which show His majesty and per¬ 
fection. So use them to call on Allah when you ask 
for whatever you wish for. Also leave those who 
turn away from the truth of these names by assign¬ 
ing them to false dieties, or denying them, or dis¬ 
torting their meanings. Allah will repay those who 
do this with a painful punishment. 

@ Among those Allah created are a nation which is 
guided by the truth, calling others to it so that they 
are also guided, and through the truth they are just 
in their judgement. They are the leaders of guidance 
whom Allah blessed with faith and good works. 

|f| Those who deny My signs, not having faith in 
them and rejecting them, I will continue to provide 
for them in the worldly life, not to honour them, 
but to lead them on gradually until they go further 
astray. Then they will be overtaken by the punish¬ 
ment when they do not expect it. 

(Jfl I delay the punishment of such people until they 
think they will not receive a punishment, so they keep increasing in their rejection and disbelief, thus their punishment 
also increases. My Planning is Strong-I outwardly display to them Kindness, but I intend for them to be forsaken. 

|f| Do those who reject the signs of Allah and His Messenger not think about things? If they used their minds it would 
be clear to them that Muhammad (peace be upon him) is not crazy. He is a messenger from Allah, Who sent him to give 
a clear warning about the punishment of Allah. 

HI Do these people learn nothing from seeing Allah’s control of the heavens and the earth, and all the animals and plants 
and other things that Allah created in them, and their own life spans, the end of which may be near, so that they might 
repent to Allah before the time has gone? If they do not have faith in the Qur’an and the promises it contains, what other 
book will they believe in? 

(j§| Whoever Allah does not guide to the truth, sending them away from the right path, then there is no guide to direct them 
back to guidance. Allah leaves them in their misguidance and disbelief, wandering blindly, not being guided to anything 
that will ultimately benefit. 

(Jfl Those who reject the truth and proud ask you about the Hour, asking when its appointed time is. Say to them O Mu¬ 
hammad: ‘I do not have knowledge of it, nor anyone else; but Allah alone has knowledge of it. Only Allah will reveal 
its decreed time. Its appearance is hidden from all of those in the heavens and earth, and it will only come upon them 
unexpectedly.’ They ask you O Muhammad about the Hour as if you are eager to know it, not realising that you did not 
ask about it because of your knowledge of your Lord. Say to them O Muhammad: ‘The knowledge of the Hour is with 
Allah alone, but most people do not know this.’ 

<!*> Beneficial Points: 

1. Human beings have been bestowed with the senses in order to understand the signs and gain knowledge, so that they 
may attain benefit and avoid harm. 2. Calling on Allah with His beautiful names in one’s supplication is a means of 
achieving His response. One should use the name that is most appropriate to the request; for example, ‘O Forgiver-forgive 
me!’ 3. People are required to reflect on the greatness of the heavens and earth to reach the conclusion that Allah alone 
is worthy of being worshipped because He is the only One Who creates and designs. 




Al-A‘raf 


















\ WO 


$ LaSi Si <JS 

I IaJ\ ^Ojd^O^^Sl ^Ji\jjicj 

® ^Jai^LS^V^ ^-(S^0^5^^161 j 



V^pS c66j\ u6s^oo 


0 ; v-^$n1j6 \ WAi^Ix6j\X r j U^) 4j^\ 

1 6^4^6^ 6^406^1^ 3 

0^1^62^ \j^> JL ^ 3jL^^Jj0 

\ j>0^ £\^ L$X^ji\ ^\ p^PJo ob 

<* y^Qj^Jo t* rO^ t*^\ 0 ) O^L^-1^5^ 26 ^a\ 

6\;^ 


£ . ^ 


|p Say to them 0 Muhammad: ‘I do not have the 
ability to bring good to myself, or to remove any 
harm from myself, except by Allah’s will. The do¬ 
minion of these things belongs to Allah alone, and I 
only know what Allah taught me. I do not know the 
unseen, because if I did, I would have used what I 
know to serve my own interests, and to protect my¬ 
self from misfortune, due to knowing about things 
before they happened. I am only a messenger from 
Allah, warning of a painful punishment, and bring¬ 
ing good news of Allah’s generous reward for a 
people who have faith, believing that I am a mes¬ 
senger from Him, and in what was revealed to me.’ 
|f| It is He who created you from one soul, Proph¬ 
et Adam (peace be upon him), and created from 
Adam (peace be upon him) his wife, Eve, creating 
her from his rib, so he would be close friends with 
her, and find peace with her. 

When he had relations with her she became preg¬ 
nant with a light load, not noticed because it is at 
the beginning of the pregnancy. A woman contin¬ 
ues with the pregnancy going about things without 
finding it heavy, until she becomes heavy with it 
when it has grown in her belly, the two of them call 
upon their Lord, saying: ‘O our Lord, if You grant 
us a healthy child, we will be thankful for Your 
blessings.’ 

|l| But when Allah responds to their prayer, and 
gives them a healthy child as they asked, they as¬ 
cribe partners to Allah in what He gave to them 
when Allah is far above having any partner, and is 
alone in His divinity. 

Do they consider these idols and other things 
to be partners with Allah being worthy of worship, when they know that these idols create nothing. Rather, they were 
created themselves, so how can they consider them to be partners with Allah in divinity? 

{jp These things that are worshipped instead of Allah cannot help those who worship them, and cannot even help them¬ 
selves, so worshipping them is clearly foolish and ignorant. 

@ And If you call these idols which you take as Allahs to guidance, they will not respond to what you call them to, nor 
can they follow you. It is the same whether you call them, or keep silent, because they are just objects, and are not con¬ 
scious: they do not hear, and they cannot speak. 

(jl| Those you call upon instead of Allah were created by Allah, and belong to Him, so they are the same as you in that 
way, although you are better in that you are living, and are able to speak and walk, and hear and see, while your idols are 
not so. Call on them and let them respond to you if you are telling the truth in what you say about them. 

HI Do these idols which they take as Allahs have feet to walk with, or hands to act with and strike? Or do they have eyes 
to see with, or ears to hear with? If they are incapable of doing these things, how can you worship them, hoping for benefit 
from them, or to protect yourself from harm? Say O Messenger: ‘Call upon your partners all together, and plot whatever 
you will against me, and give me no respite.’ 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The verses clarify that supplicating to the Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him) to bring about benefit or protect 
from harm is ignorance. Benefit only comes through following the instructions he was sent with. 

2. Allah, from His Kindness and Mercy, made a man’s wife from the same source as him, so that he would feel close 
to her, treat her well, and for them to enjoy each other’s company, and to realise the divine wisdom in having children. 

3. It is not appropriate for the Children of Adam who are the best and most noble of creation, to worship false Allahs made 
of insignificant paltry items such as stone and wood and the like. 

4. It is incumbent on the one of sound mind that he directs his worship to Allah alone, for it is Allah alone Who gave 
us the the Faith through the revelation of His scripture, which contains the knowledge of spiritual matters and worldly 
matters and benefits, and protects and helps the righteous among his creation, so that they are not harmed by those who 
oppose them. 


06 ^^ 

^ _ a 0 * *t> } 

\j>l\ 


Al-A‘raf 


175 























\v^ 




^=^jZ^> ^^.3 $ iyt o^-Xj cyJ^\j I 

\J^L I 

Jsl^ \ Xs*~ (JjJ) OjJ^ri.^j^Lrb I 

^a!p>j 1*1$ (w) ^Jf^j^\3 <-4>-^ 



^ \J) \S 2o\2j p_43\5 j) \ (^ 


|f| Truly, my protector is Allah, Who keeps me 
safe, so that I need no one besides Him. I fear noth¬ 
ing from your idols, because Allah sent down the 
Book as a guidance to people; and it is He Who 
protects those who do good among His creation, 
keeping them safe and helping them. 

@ Those you call upon O idolators from amongst 
these idols, are not able to help you, and are not 
able to help themselves. For they are utterly inca¬ 
pable, unable to do anything. So how can you call 
upon them instead of calling upon Allah? 

<jf| If you call your idols which you worship instead 
of Allah to the right path and steadfastness, they 
will not hear you calling them. You see them facing 
you with painted eyes, objects that cannot see! For 
they used to make statues in the form of people and 
animals, with hands, feet and eyes, but they were 
just objects, inanimate and unable to move. 

(jf| Accept from people O Messenger what they are 
able to do, the actions and conduct that is easy for 
them, and do not require them to do things that are 
too difficult for them, because that will drive them 
away. Instruct them to speak in a beautiful way and 
to do good actions, and turn away from those who 
are foolish and do not face them in their ignorance, 
returning like for like. Whoever harms you, do not 
harm them; and whoever denies you something, do 
not deny them. 

HI And If you feel that Satan is bringing you an 
evil suggestion or stopping you from doing good, 
then ask Allah for protection and seek refuge with 
Him. He hears whatever you say, and is aware of 
you when you seek protection, and He will protect 
you from him. 

(jf| Those who are mindful of Allah, following what He instructs and staying away from what He has prohibited, when 
an evil suggestion comes to them from Satan to do something wrong, they remember the might of Allah and His pun¬ 
ishment for the wrongdoers and His reward for those who do good. They turn away from their disobedience, turning to 
Allah asking for forgiveness, so that they do the right thing, seeing clearly what they were doing wrong, and hold back 
from doing it. 

(jf| The brothers of the satans, who commit immorality and disbelieve, are drawn by the satans into greater error, commit¬ 
ting sin after sin. They do not stop in their efforts: neither the satans with their misguidance nor those who are immoral 
and who follow them, committing evil. |f| And If you O Messenger come with a sign, they reject it and turn away from 
it; and if you do not come to them with a sign, they ask why he did not produce one. Say to them O Messenger: ‘It is not 
up to me to just come with a sign. Rather, I only follow what was revealed to me from Allah: the Qur’an which I recite 
to you, an evidence and proof from Allah your Creator, the arranger of your lives, a guidance and mercy for the believers 
among His creation. As for those who do not have faith, then they are lost and wretched.’ |§D When the Qur’an is recited, 
listen to it being recited: do not talk, and do not busy yourself with something else, so that Allah may have mercy on 
you. (jfl And remember Allah your Lord, humbly, with lowliness before Him, and with fear and awe. Call upon him in 
a moderate manner, not too loudly, at the beginning and end of the day, because of the special qualities of these times, 
and do not be among those who neglect the remembrance of Allah the Exalted. |i| The angels who are with your Lord 
are never too proud to worship Him, Glory be to Him. Rather, they devote themselves to worship with dedication, never 
tiring, glorifying Him day and night, and prostrating to Him. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. These verses contain good news for the Muslims who follow the path of their Prophet (peace be upon him): Allah will 
help them as he helped his prophet and his allies. 2. The traits of good character that a believer should possess include 
forgiving those who wrong them, giving to those who deny them something, and mending relations with those who 
break them. 3. It is incumbent on the servant if Satan overpowers him and he commits a sin, then they should ask Allah 
for forgiveness, correcting what he did wrong, repenting sincerely to Him and doing good actions to erase what he did. 


S ' ($l ^==== 0 ^ 


iffi l Al-A^af 




















The Gains of War (Surah Al-Anfal) 


’ ® Themes of the Surah: 

An explanation of the laws of struggle for the sake 
of Allah, and the reasons for victory and defeat in 
the Battle of Badr. 

® Explanation: 

© Your Companions ask you O Messenger about 
the gains of war and how to distribute it, and who 
it should be for. Say to them: ‘The gains of war are 
for Allah and His Messenger to distribute, and it 
is only incumbent on you to accept and comply in 
the matter, so be mindful of Allah, following what 
He instructed and staying away from what He had 
prohibited, correct disagreements between your¬ 
selves and mend bad relations, and develop good 
terms with each other through treating each other 
in a good way and forgiving each other. Follow Al¬ 
lah and His Messenger if you are true believers, for 
surely faith leads to doing good and staying away 
from disobedience.’ 

This matter came up after the Battle of Badr. 

© The true believers are those who, when Allah is 
mentioned, feel awe of Him in their hearts, which 
make them do good actions. When the verses of 
Allah are read to them they reflect on them and it 
increases their faith, and they rely on Allah alone to 
bring them what is in their interests and to protect 
them from what is bad for them. 

© Those who regularly establish the prayer, as it 
should be established, and in its set times, and who 
spend from what Allah has provided-on what is ob¬ 
ligatory as well as what is recommended. 

© Such people are true believers, combining the qualities of inner faith and outer surrender. Their reward is in having a 
high rank with their Lord, forgiveness for their disobedience, and a generous provision, which is the bliss that Allah has 
prepared for them. 

© Just as Allah took away the decision about the division of the gains of war from the Companions after their disagree¬ 
ment about how to distribute it, and made the decision for Himself and His Messenger (peace be upon him), He also 
instructed the Messenger (peace be upon him), through inspiration, to go out from Medina to meet the idol worshippers, 
although a group of the believers disliked this. 

© This group of the believers argued with the Messenger about fighting the idolaters, after it had been made clear to 
them that it had to happen, as if they were being driven to death, looking at it with open eyes. Their reaction was due to 
their strong dislike of going out to fight, because they were not prepared or ready for it. 

© Allah reminds the believers who were arguing about when Allah promised them success over one of the groups of 
the idolaters: either the caravan with its sizeable wealth, so that they could take its bounty, or a group of fighters whom 
they would encounter and achieve victory over them; but they had wanted it to be the caravan, as this would be easy to 
take without having to fight. Yet Allah willed for the truth to be established through commanding them to fight, to kill the 
leaders of the idolaters, and to capture many of them so that the strength of Islam would become clear. 

© This occurred so that Allah may establish the truth by making Islam and its people victorious, and for Him to make 
clear the error of falsehood, even if the idolaters disliked this. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. A believer should strengthen and increase his faith, because faith increases and decreases. It increases with worship and 
doing good actions, and decreases with not worshipping and by doing bad actions. 

2. Debate is appropriate when the truth of something is not clear; but once something becomes clear, then it is only right 
to follow it and act according to it. 

3. The division of the gains of war was consigned to the Messenger (peace and blessings be upon him), and all decisions 
concerning it were referred to Allah and His Messenger alone. 

4. The verses confirm the believers’ desire for divine help, to establish the truth and show falsehood for what it is. 


| lii(£) 

0V3 (^1)4 

J ^ < ***+' of T 

ijyo j^===u 

i 0 'M 


Al-Anfal 



















j 

V vAAvd 

< 

> 




G-'Z'P 9 "*?. f f 2 ? s' s I 


JJ/OJ AJ*-* 


U* 

A 


y/ 


f 

ry&G' 


j^Cxpc-^ 5 jo_^ J rl ji l \ 

X$^\ *j< l>yyjj^==ujfe\j^Z) 

y_j^ \ S) aSC 214 \ ^1 ($) 

^ \{y^==^CJ^ \ ^~?_J^> (3 ^jai \Jl ^**\ * 

J4% ^) <i>^?44^1iL^-5 3 \^^ ^ 

4J^ ^ ^yX^Cyj J^J^i !JJ <i\\y>Lil) 

f ^^ ^~~ ====l\j i*3 ’ 9 o_q 3 9-X3 i Jo-A-2^ 

0j\^iyyj>j> iy 


OC- 


@ Remember the day of Badr, when the Muslims 
asked for help from Allah for victory over their ene¬ 
mies, and Allah responded to them, reinforcing and 
helping them with a thousand angels, following one 
after another. 

(Sj| Allah made the reinforcement of the Muslims 
with angels a form of good news for them: that He 
was helping them against their enemies, reassur¬ 
ing their hearts that they would have victory over 
them. Victory does not come because of having 
great numbers of fighters, or having large amounts 
of weapons and preparations; rather, it comes only 
from Allah, Glory be to Him. Allah is Mighty in His 
power, no one has power over Him, and He is Wise 
in His law and His decree. 

(jp) And remember O believers when Allah made 
you fall asleep on that occasion, giving you a feel¬ 
ing of safety and peace from the fear you had of 
your enemy. He sent down rain from the sky on you, 
to purify you, and to remove the evil suggestions of 
Satan from you and to make your hearts strong, so 
you would be patient when you met the enemy in 
battle. It also made your feet firm, by making the 
sandy ground hard so that your feet would not sink 
and slip on it. 

@ Remember O Prophet when Allah inspired the 
angels, who He reinforced the believers with in the 
Battle of Badr, telling the angels: I am with you. 
aiding you with help and support, so strengthen the 
determination of the believers in fighting their en¬ 
emy. I will cast great fear into the hearts of those 
who disbelieve. Strike then the necks of the disbe¬ 
lievers to kill them and hit their joints and limbs to 
hinder them from fighting. 

(jjj) What happened to the disbelievers, when they were killed and their limbs were struck, was because they went against 
Allah and His Messenger. They did not follow what they were instructed to do, and did not stop doing what they were 
told not to do. Those who oppose Allah and His Messenger, Allah is firm with the punishment for them in this world, with 
death and capture, and in the Afterlife, with the fire of Hell. 

@ That is the punishment for you, O you who oppose Allah and His Messenger, so taste it, for it has been hastened to you 
in the life of this world. In the Afterlife, you will have the punishment of the fire of Hell if you die stubbornly denying 
the truth. 

@ O you who believe in Allah and who follow His Messenger, if you meet the idolaters approaching them in battle, then 
do not turn your backs to them and run away; but be patient when facing them, and firm when you meet, because Allah 
is with you with His help and support. 

@ And whoever turns their back running away- unless they are withdrawing as a strategy with the intention of turning 
back to fight, or doing it to join a group of Muslims in order to help them-then certainly, he will earn the anger of Allah, 
and his place in the Hereafter will be Hell; what a miserable destination and final destiny! 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The verses show Allah’s care for the believers, making things easier for them by sending ways of strengthening their 
faith and making their footholds firm, and taking away difficulty and the whisperings of Satan from them. 

2. Victory is in Allah’s hands, and is from Him, and does not depend on the number of people fighting or their weapons 
and preparations, notwithstanding the importance of the duty to make the best preparation for war that one can. 

3. Running away from fighting without an excuse is a great sin. 

4. These verses teach the believers about the laws of fighting in war, among which are obeying Allah and His Messenger, 
being patient before the enemy, steadfast during fighting, and remembering Allah much. 


Xjh 3 



Part 























@ For you did not O believers, kill the idolaters on 
the day of Badr because of your power and might, 
but rather Allah supported you in that. And you O 
Prophet did not throw sand at the idolaters, rather it 
was Allah, Who made what you throw reach them. 
Allah tested the believers by blessing them with 
victory over their enemies, despite their small num¬ 
bers of fighters and weapons, so that they might be 
thankful to Him. Indeed Allah listens to your prayers 
and what you say, and He knows what you do, and 
what is best for you. @ The killing of the idolaters, 
your throwing, so that they were defeated, as well as 
Allah’s kindness to the believers giving them victory 
over their enemy, was all from Allah. Allah makes 
weak the plans of those who disbelieve and who plot 
against Islam. @ If you ask O idolaters, for the pun¬ 
ishment and might of Allah to fall upon the wrong¬ 
doers who overstep the limits, then Allah has already 
made what you asked afflict you, sending down on 
you what was a lesson for you and for the mindful. 
If you stop asking for this it would be better for you, 
so that He might give you time, not giving you what 
you deserve immediately. But if you return to ask¬ 
ing for a judgement and fighting the believers, Allah 
would also return by afflicting you with punishment 
and helping the believers. Your people and helpers 
would not be of any good to you, even if they are 
many and well prepared and the believers were few 
in number. Allah is with the believers, helping and 

believe in Allah and follow His Messenger, obey Al¬ 
lah and His Messenger, following what He instructs 
and staying away from what He has prohibited, not 
turning away from Him or going against His laws, and doing what He has forbidden especially whilst you are listening to 
the verses of Allah being recited to you. @ And do not be O you believers, like the hypocrites and idolators who when the 
verses of Allah are recited to them, say that they have heard the Qur’an that has been recited to them, when they have not 
listened in a reflective way, learning from it so that they would benefit from what they heard. @ The worst of creatures on 
the face of the earth in the sight of Allah are those who are deaf to the truth, not listening to it and accepting it; and dumb, not 
acknowledging the truth or calling to it, because they do not understand what Allah instructs or forbids. @ If Allah knew 
that there was good in these idolaters who reject the truth, He would have made them listen in a way that was beneficial 
to them, so that they would understand the proof and evidence; but He knows that there is no good in them, and that if He 
made them hear, they would still turn away stubbornly, rejecting what they heard. @ O you who have faith in Allah and 
follow His Messenger, respond to Allah and His Messenger, being dedicated to the instructions and staying away from what 
is prohibited, since their is life for you in that. And be aware that Allah has power over everything, and He has power over 
you; so He is able to hinder you from following the truth after you had rejected it. So you should hurry to comply without 
delay, and be mindful that you will be gathered to Allah alone on the Day of Judgement, and will be rewarded for the actions 
that you did in this world, jjj Beware of suffering that does not only reach those who do wrong among you, but reaches you 
and others as well. This is when disobedience becomes widespread and is not prevented. Be sure that Allah is strong with 
the punishment for those who go against Him, so beware of opposing Him. 

Beneficial Points: 1. Whoever Allah is with will be aided and given victory, even if they are weak or few in number; 
and His being with them and aiding them is according to their faith and good actions. 2. The believer is expected to take 
the necessary means and precautions in order to help fulfil their responsibilities they have been given by Allah. They should 
then trust in Allah, entrusting their affairs to Him and leaving the outcome to Him. 3. The might of the disbelievers becomes 
insignificant before the power and ability of Allah. He makes the plotting of the disbelievers come to nothing and puts fear in 
their hearts. 4. The verses show that Allah does not prevent anyone from faith and goodness except those who have no good 
in them, who faith would not help or benefit. 5. It is good to frequently supplicate to Allah with the prayer: ‘O turner of the 
hearts! Keep our hearts firm on your faith.’ 6. Allah instructs the believers not to allow disobedience to become widespread 
among them, so that punishment does not come upon them all. 


supporting them, and whomever Allah assists, then 
no one will be able to defeat them. (j>j) O you who 





















^aj^A-ij} Jo^J >. ^== =l>j(^ (^U^ 



^ uui \ Qj Cj (n) --Sl^ 


'04 


^\55 



i\* ^: 0 ^-^J^Wil^ 

4SG r ui^4jj^3 

Oj£^>J\frj£$\ A^JjuJ)\ 




@ Remember when the believers were in Makkah, 
and they were few, and the people of Makkah con¬ 
sidered them to be weak and overpowered them. 

They were scared that their enemies would capture 
them; but Allah brought them together to a safe 
place, which was Medina, and made them strong, 
helping them against their enemies on the battle¬ 
fields, for example at Badr, and giving them good 
things, among them the war gains they got from 
their enemies. This was all so that they might be 
thankful to Allah for His blessings, that He might 
increase them, and for them not to be ungrateful so 
that He removes the blessings from them and pun¬ 
ishes them. 

@ O you who believe in Allah and follow His Mes¬ 
senger, do not betray Allah and His Messenger by 
disobeying the commands and failing to stay away 
from the prohibitions. You must not knowingly be¬ 
tray your trusts, such as debts and so on. 

Love of wealth and children can lead to not doing 
what is right; therefore, Allah informs us that they 
are only a test. 

Be aware O believers that your wealth and 
children are a test for you, and your conduct with 
them may prevent you from performing good ac¬ 
tions for your Afterlife, or lead to betraying your 
trusts. Know that with Allah is a great reward, so be 
careful not to lose this reward because of becoming 
engrossed with them, and you cheating the people 
because of them. 

@ O you who believe in Allah and His messengers, 
know that if you are Mindful, following what He 
instructs and staying away from what He has pro¬ 
hibited, He will give you the ability to discriminate between truth and falsehood, so you will not be confused as regards to 
them, and He will erase from you the evil you have committed, and forgive your sins. To Allah belongs immense bounty, 
and from His great bounty is His Paradise which He has prepared for those who are Mindful among His creation. 

Remember, O Messenger, when the idolaters joined forces against you, plotting to kill or imprison you, or to drive 
you out of your homeland to another place. They plotted, and Allah turned their plot upon themselves, and Allah plans, 
and He is the best of planners. 

@ If Allah’s words are recited to them, they say - stubborn against the truth, considering themselves above it, and dis¬ 
believing - that they have heard something similar before, and that if they wanted to say something similar to the Qur’an 
they could, saying that the Qur’an is just the fables of earlier peoples. 

@ Remember when the idolaters said to Allah that if what Muhammad brought was true, then He should rain rocks down 
from the sky to destroy them, or bring them a painful punishment. They said this going to extremes in their denial and 
rejection. 

But Allah would not punish your nation O Muhammad, with a punishment that destroyed them while you are living 
among them, for you living among them keeps them safe from this punishment. And Allah would not punish them as long 
as they asked Him for forgiveness for their sins. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Thankfulness is a great blessing which increases the blessings of Allah; and blessings decrease when thankfulness 
is neglected. 2. Trustworthiness is one of the essential qualities of a good Muslim, which should be firmly established 
amongst the numerous good character traits. Having it is a proof of the integrity of the soul and the balance of its actions. 
3. The reward with Allah for restraining the self from things which are forbidden is better than any apparent advantage 
gained from dealings with ones wealth and children in a blameworthy way. 4. The verses confirm the virtue and blessings 
of asking for forgiveness, and that it is something that prevents a people from receiving a punishment. 5. The verses 
illustrate the foolishness of those people who turned away from the guidance because they did not ask Allah that, if what 
Muhammad brought was true, they be guided to it. 


UAJai 13 j 

\ Alto ol^=^oi ^ \ 






















o^=Uj (^) 
^-J\\ _A_3 


J j> 


'*■*} .K 


>'--'4^AAA ==3 i_rU^ j oJX*>*l) oj-^>-j^£k> j 




• 4<U 


\ ^ ^ - u 
i^^poo^v 


J^-fl3 


p What prevents them being punished when they 
have unjustly stopped people from performing both 
the circling (|awaf) and the prayer in the Sacred 
. Mosque - actions deserving of punishment? The 
idolaters are not Allah’s allies. The allies of Allah 
are only those who are mindful of Him by fulfill¬ 
ing His instructions and avoiding His prohibitions. 
Most of the idolaters do not know this, as they 
, claim they are Allah’s allies when they are not. 

| The prayer of the idolaters at the Sacred Mosque 
was nothing but whistling and clapping. So taste, O 
idolaters, the punishment of being killed or taken 
prisoner on the day of Badr because of your disbe¬ 
lief in Allah and rejection of His Messenger. 

(@ Disbelievers in Allah spend their wealth to pre¬ 
vent people from Allah’s religion, but they will not 
achieve their goal. The end result of their spending 
of wealth in this way will be sadness, because they 
, will lose their wealth and fail in their goal; and then 
they will be defeated by the believers. Disbelievers 
in Allah will be driven to Hell on the Day of Judge¬ 
ment and will enter it to live there eternally. 

p Disbelievers who spend their wealth to prevent 
, people from the path of Allah will be driven to the 
fire of Hell, so that Allah may isolate the wicked 
group of disbelievers from the pure group of believ¬ 
ers, and so that He may place bad people, actions 
and wealth on top of one another in a pile and place 
, them in the fire of Hell. They are the losers, because 
they will lose their souls and their families on the 
Day of Judgement. 

(Sj|S) Say, O Messenger, to those of your people who 
disbelieve in Allah and His Messenger that if they 
stop disbelieving in Allah and His Messenger and preventing the believers from Allah’s path, then Allah will forgive their 
past sins, because Islam wipes out what is before it; but if they return to their disbelief, then Allah’s way of dealing with 
earlier people has already come as a warning: when they rejected and continued in their disbelief, He swiftly punished 
them. 

@ O believers, fight your disbelieving enemies until there is no more idolatry or Muslims being stopped from Allah’s 
religion, when religion and obedience is for Allah alone without any partner being put alongside Him. If the disbelievers 
stop their idolatry and preventing Muslims from Allah’s religion, then leave them, because Allah sees what they do and 
nothing is hidden from Him. 

@ If they turn away from the order to leave disbelief and preventing others from Allah’s religion, then be certain, O 
believers, that Allah will help you against them. What an excellent protector He is for the one He protects, and what an 
excellent helper He is for the one He helps! Whoever He protects will be successful and whoever He helps will be vic¬ 
torious. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Preventing others from the Sacred Mosque is a great offence for which the offender deserves a punishment in this 
world prior to the punishment in the Hearafter. 

2. Upkeep of the Sacred Mosque and taking charge of it is an honour that only Allah’s allies who are mindful of Him 
deserve. 

3. The verses contain a warning to the disbelievers that their spending their wealth for falsehood will not accomplish 
anything. They will soon be overcome with regret and extreme remorse. 

4. Allah’s call to the disbelievers to repent and to believe is an open call to them despite their persistent stubbornness. 

5. The person whose protector and helper is Allah can have no fear. The person whose enemy is Allah can have no honour. 




1 0 I 




















"H Cp^J 0^ v^ ^ L f ' ' l£^4j 

oV3jJai \ j^\j Laj <&\j JLs^£= 

^<$) j^===="<^ 

4^1?}.4>^ii JU^jia 

<5* — ,£LA o^== V^-*^ aj^ j£=====&j 

Jji 'f \ s*^> ^ & ,s ? s' / / »— ,-- v'1. —’ ,♦ S' ? S' S' {f s' 

"' pii£^j^il_^\3o^=^=^ii 
' ^^===d\-fljj*^-^^===c^^t|jv-^a.’^^ j\^L-A^lSCj4 



@ Know, O believers, that whatever you take by 
force from the disbelievers when striving in Allah’s 
path shall be divided into five. Four-fifths shall be 
distributed to those who strove in Allah’s path and 
the remaining fifth shall be further divided into five 
portions and distributed equally between the fol¬ 
lowing: Allah and His Messenger, to be spent on 
the general expenses of the Muslims; the relatives 
of the Prophet (peace be upon him) from the Chil¬ 
dren of Hashim and the Children of Al-Muffalib; 
orphans; the poor and destitute; and travellers who 
are stranded. Obey this if you have faith in Allah 
and what He revealed to His servant, Muhammad 
(peace be upon him), on the day of the Battle of 
Badr, when Allah made a clear distinction between 
truth and falsehood by giving you victory over your 
enemies. 

<Sj) Remember, O believers, when you were on the 
near side of the valley that was facing Medina, the 
idolaters were on the far side that was facing Mak- 
kah and the caravan was at a spot lower than you 
facing the Red Sea. If you and the idolaters made 
an appointment with each other to meet at Badr, 
neither of you would have kept to it: your lack of 
numbers as compared to your enemy would have 
kept you back, and the fear of facing Allah’s Mes¬ 
senger would have kept them back. But Allah, may 
He be glorified, gathered you at Badr without an 
appointment, so that He may carry out a matter that 
was already determined: the victory of the believers 
and the defeat of the disbelievers - bringing honour 
to His religion and humiliation to idolatry. This was 
so that those who died from amongst them would 
die after evidence was established by the believers’ victory against them, despite their lack of numbers and preparation, 
and so that those who lived would live with clear evidences that Allah made obvious to them, and no one would have 
any evidence against Allah that they could use as an argument. Allah hears the statements of everyone and knows their 
actions. Nothing is hidden from Him and He will repay them for that. 

@ Remember, O Messenger, Allah’s favour upon you, and upon the believers, when He showed you a dream in which the 
idolaters were few in number. You informed the believers about this and they took it as a good sign, and their determina¬ 
tion to face the enemy in battle was strengthened. If Allah had shown the idolaters to you to be many, the detennination of 
your Companions would have become weak and they would have become afraid of fighting. But Allah saved you all from 
that and protected them from losing courage. He therefore made them seem few in number in the eye of His Messenger 
(peace be upon him). He knows what the hearts contain and what the souls hide. 

@ Remember, O believers, when Allah showed the idolaters to you, when you met them, as few and made you bravely 
go forward towards fighting them; and He made you seem few in their eyes, so that they came forward to fight you, with¬ 
out thinking of leaving. This was so that Allah could bring about a matter that was predetermined by taking retribution 
from the idolaters by them being killed or taken prisoners, and by favouring the believers with victory and defeat of their 
enemies. All matters are returned to Allah alone and He will repay the one who does evil for his wrongdoing and the one 
who does good for his good deeds. 

@ O you who have faith in Allah and follow His Messenger, when you fight against a group of disbelievers be patient 
when you meet them and do not become cowardly. Remember Allah much and call on Him, because He is the One Who 
can help you against them; and pray to Him to grant you what you desire and protect you from what you fear. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Gains of war belong to Allah and He allocates them as He wills, without anyone else dictating the terms. 

2. Allah paves the way for the victory of the Muslims by giving them the right support that they need at the correct mo¬ 
ment. 

3. Patience, steadfastness and remembering Allah much are among the main causes of victory. 




i> K\ 





























5 j 1 ^j \ 'JSjJ ^-AP-i cAft^CJP ^= 
U^j ^SiA^— ^XLPa&j 4&\ lPP' & 

PS3^ $j.>;4&i y&£&& 

a^=C>A $ A ~"$> -> P\33kj A^—iC'^p 
dyb ■>!($) <-->\jid\ ij Jp> a3\J 4jd (JjU-^ gVo*l£P 
> 4 r°.i «^j 2 >J-^u^ 3 aljMj 5 pPP 3 \ 

33(Qs33pp^^\pp\3p\ 


| 54^1^==i^tl^^Dii0^3i^ 


AiA'i Q 3s>\^j i_? jLf££?3\3 3^3Jrj 

($) 4jd PJ3y^=KlS j\ J3Ia-J 

4Ji\ <^^\iy!^===JL£\^S 0£ud^b *■ ’-r^-^" 

10oHA\ iixi>*fe 

Al-Anfal 183 Part 10 



@ Observe Allah’s obedience and the obedience of 
His Prophet in all of your statements, actions and 
circumstances. Do not argue with one another be¬ 
cause dispute leads to weakness, cowardliness and 
the diminishing of your strength. Be patient when 
facing the enemy because Allah supports and as¬ 
sists the patient. Whoever Allah is with will defi¬ 
nitely be victorious. 

@ Do not be like those idolaters who left Makkah 
full of pride, showing off to people, and who pre¬ 
vent people from Allah’s religion and stop them 
from entering into it. Allah is All-Aware of what 
they do. No action of theirs is hidden from Him and 
He will repay them for that. 

@ Remember, O believers, Allah’s favour on 
you when Satan made the actions of the idolaters 
seem good to them and encouraged them to face 
the Muslims in battle by saying to them, ‘No one 
can defeat you today because I am your supporter 
and I will protect you from your enemy’. When the 
two parties - the believers who had the angels as 
their support and the idolaters who had Satan who 
was going to desert them - met, Satan turned back 
fleeing and said to the idolaters: I have nothing to 
do with you. I can see the angels who have come to 
support the believers and I am afraid that Allah will 
destroy me. Allah’s punishment is harsh and no one 
is able to bear it. 

@ Remember when the hypocrites and those of 
weak faith were saying: The religion of these peo¬ 
ple - which promised them victory over their ene¬ 
mies despite their lack of numbers and preparation 
as compared to the huge number and the strength of 


their enemies - has deceived them. 

They have not understood that the person who places reliance upon Allah alone and who has faith in the victory that Allah 
has promised, Allah will assist such a person and will never desert them no matter how weak they may be. Allah is Mighty 
and no one can overcome Him. He is Wise in His decree and sacred laws. 

If only you, O Messenger, could see those who disbelieve in Allah and His messengers at the time when the angels 
remove their souls, striking their faces when they face towards them and striking their backs when they try to run away, 
and saying to them: Taste, O disbelievers, the burning punishment! If you had to see that, you would see a serious 
heart-wrenching sight. 

{§§) The cause of that painful punishment at the time when your souls are taken out and the burning punishment in your 
graves and in the Afterlife is because of the evil actions you performed in the world. Allah does not wrong people, but 
passes judgement on them with fairness. He is not unjust to His slaves. 

@ These disbelievers were not the only ones to be punished this way; rather, it is Allah’s way of dealing with disbelievers 
in every time and place. The people of Pharaoh and the communities before them were also punished like this when they 
disbelieved in Allah’s words. Allah punished them for their sins with His might and power. Allah is Strong and cannot be 
overpowered or defeated. His punishment for those who go against Him is severe. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Pride is a serious illness that affects an individual’s personality and quickly ruins his nature. 

2. Patience helps in coping with hardships and difficulties. Also, Allah sends divine help to the person who is patient in 
obeying His sacred law. This is something witnessed in various walks of life. 

3. Quarrels and disputes lead to disunity in the community and warn of defeat, withdrawal and loss of strength, support 
and power. 

4. The verses show that entitlement to favours depend on correct beliefs, good actions and high morals. 

5. Faith makes a person go forward to do amazing things which even great armies will not advance to do. 

6. One of Allah’s customs is to punish those who do wrong by sinning. 



















@ That severe punishment is because when Allah 
favours a people, He does not take it away from 
them until they change themselves from their pure 
state of faith, righteousness and gratitude to a bad 
state of disbelief in Allah, sin and ingratitude - Al¬ 
lah hears the statements of His servants and knows 
about their actions; nothing is hidden from Him. 

(j|j) The case of these disbelievers is like that of oth¬ 
ers who disbelieved in Allah, such as the people of 
Pharaoh and the communities who rejected Allah 
before them. They rejected the verses of their Lord 
so Allah destroyed them because of the sins they 
committed. Allah destroyed the people of Pharaoh 
by causing them to drown in the sea. The people of 
Pharaoh, as well as the communities before them, 
were all disobedient because of their disbelief in 
Allah and their association of partners with Him. 

They therefore deserved the punishment Allah im¬ 
posed on them. 

@ The worst of those who walk on the earth are 
those who disbelieve in Allah and His messengers, 
and who would not believe even if every sign was 
to come to them - they would still persist in dis¬ 
belief. The means of guidance - such as intellect, 
hearing and sight - are of no use to these people. 

^ Some of these Jewish disbelievers agreed a 
treaty to not fight against you, O Messenger, nor 
support any one else in fighting against you. They, 
then, break this treaty every time you make it with 
them. They have no fear of Allah so they do not 
fulfil their oaths and do not honour the promises 
taken from them. 

@ If you, O Messenger, face in battle these people 
who break their pledges, then make a harsh example of them so that others hear about it, take a lesson from that and 
become afraid of fighting you and supporting your enemies against you. 

(j|) If you, O Messenger, become afraid, due to a sign that becomes obvious to you, that a people with whom you entered 
into a treaty will betray you and break the treaty, then inform them that the treaty is cancelled, so that they are not unjustly 
disadvantaged. Do not attack them suddenly without informing them, because doing so will be treachery on your part and 
Allah does not love those who are treacherous. Instead, He detests such people, so be careful of treachery. 

(Sj | The disbelievers should not think that they have escaped from Allah’s punishment, because they cannot do so. Instead, 
it will surely fall upon them. 

Prepare, O believers, whatever numbers and war equipment you are able to, including keeping trained horses to be 
used in Allah’s path, so you can frighten Allah’s enemies and your enemies from among the disbelievers who are eagerly 
waiting for you to be afflicted with a disaster. You can also frighten others whom you do not know of and whose hidden 
hatred you are not aware of. Allah alone knows them and He knows what they keep hidden inside themselves. Any wealth 
you spend, whether a little or much, Allah will replace it for you in this world and will give you the reward for it in full 
in the Afterlife without any reduction. So hurry towards spending in His path. 

(Sjj) If they incline to a truce to give up fighting, then, O Messenger, do the same: enter into a truce with them and place 
your reliance and faith in Allah, because He will never desert you. He is the One Who hears your statements and knows 
your intentions and actions. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. One of the benefits of the legal punishments for crimes is that they deter many from committing those crimes. They 
also deter those who have committed them from repeating the offence. 

2. One of the characteristics of the believers is that they fulfil the pledges they make with others, unless it is proven that 
they were treacherous. 

3. The Muslims must remain prepared with various types of weapons and plans to frighten the enemy. 

4. It is permissible to make peace with the enemy if it is in the best interests of the Muslims. 


S\'t^}\'%0 jLAS £^^4i>\ c> )j | 

-C£s>cf3f\0 

\ 5 & 0 

J^ z === ^ 






Al-Anfal 


Part 10 
























2bi 



£)\$ o'' J^CuP 4^\ 

^11 

^1 / // ^ ^ ^ ^ *\J\X • -" . ^ 2,t /\^ "£ 

.^| cPj^&^Jo^S* ’ ’^^3 0_y^0^ 

| y^=t5 ji-\ (3>^ Si 


(S§§) If, by inclining to a truce, their goal is to deceive 
you, O Messenger, so that they can prepare to fight 
you, then Allah is sufficient for you against their 
plot and deception. It is He Who strengthened you 
with His help and with those Emigrants and Help¬ 
ers who have faith in you. 

He brought the hearts of the believers, with 
whom He assisted you, together after they were 
disunited. If you had spent all the wealth on earth to 
bring their disunited hearts together, you would not 
have been able to do so. But Allah alone brought 
them together. He is Mighty in His dominion and 
nothing can overpower Him. He is Wise in His de¬ 
cree, handling of affairs and sacred laws. 

@ O Prophet, Allah is sufficient for you against 
the evil of your enemies and He is sufficient for the 
believers who are with you. So trust in Allah and 
rely on Him. 

(j§S) O Prophet, urge the believers on to fight and 
encourage them to do so with words that will 
strengthen their determination and lift their spirits. 
If there are among you, O believers, twenty who are 
patient in fighting against the disbelievers, they will 
overcome two hundred of the disbelievers. And if 
there are among you one hundred who are patient, 
they will overcome one thousand of the disbeliev¬ 
ers. That is because the disbelievers are a people 
who do not understand Allah’s custom of aiding 
His friends and defeating His enemies. They do not 
realise the goal of fighting and they therefore only 
fight in order to gain supremacy in the world. 

@ Now Allah has lightened the burden from you, 
O believers, since He knows your weakness. He has 
lightened your burden out of His grace and has made it a duty that one of you remains patient against two disbelievers 
instead of ten. So if there are one hundred among you who remain patient in fighting against the disbelievers, they will 
defeat two hundred. And if there are one thousand among you who remain patient, they will defeat two thousand of the 
disbelievers with Allah’s permission. Allah, with His support and assistance, is with those believers who remain patient. 
@) It is not right for a prophet to take captives from the disbelievers who fight against him until he kills many of them, so 
that this makes other disbelievers fear fighting him. By taking captives from Badr, O believers, you want to receive ran¬ 
som, but Allah wants the Afterlife for you, which is gained by making religion victorious and powerful. Allah is Mighty in 
His essence, His attributes and in His domination. Nothing can overcome Him. He is Wise in His decree and sacred laws. 
@ Were it not for a decree from Allah - in which it had already been decided that He would make the gains of war lawful 
for you and permit you to ransom captives - a severe punishment from Allah would have afflicted you because of the 
gains of war and ransom you took from the captives at Badr before the coming of revelation from Allah that permitted it. 
@ So consume, O believers, of the gains of war that you take from the disbelievers because it is lawful for you. Be mind¬ 
ful of Allah by following His instructions and avoiding His prohibitions. Allah is Forgiving and Compassionate towards 
His believing servants. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The verses contain a promise from Allah to His believing servants that He will be sufficient for them and aid them 
against their enemies. 

2. Muslims are obligated to go forward striving in Allah’s path with high spirits, remarkable bravery, unwavering patience 
and firm determination. 

3. Muslims are obligated to remain patient in front of the enemy, unless there is a valid excuse to do otherwise. 

4. Allah loves noble things for His servants and dislikes that which is trivial. He therefore urges them to seek the eternal 
reward of the Afterlife. 

5. The ransom of captives or their release can only take place after complete domination and authority over the disbeliev¬ 
ers is achieved and the supremacy of the Islamic state is demonstrated to others. 





















un 




^\ ^y&.cA^ t$^ '■^3 K 

^==iJjiJoj_^o-a jp j\s ,j 

3\j\X- j 3 yS^sfe 


& 




^Jjy^J\jj\* l)j-^\$ ||^ 

%l$* CA^-0^J CA^ ^ \lfr&’)j]P^ j 
&&\ iJ^jA=4^ $$&&£ lAS 

>^t\ 

14^'JC 

| 3d?j^ 

f' IjP^jIsj''* Ct&\j 4$\ J~^ j 


j j> 


| isife^fco $$0& 


*>? -')) 
*3>JJJ o 


@ O Prophet, say to those idolater captives who 
have come into your hands after the Battle of Badr: 

If Allah knows of any good intentions in your 
hearts, He will give you something better than the 
ransom that was taken from you; so do not grieve 
over what was taken from you. Allah will also for¬ 
give your sins because He is Forgiving and Com¬ 
passionate to those of His servants who repent to 
Him. 

This promise of Allah was fullfilled for ‘Abbas, 
the uncle of the Prophet (peace be upon him), and 
for others like him who accepted Islam after being 
captured. 

@ If their goal, O Muhammad, is to betray you by 
the words they utter, then they have betrayed Allah 
previously and Allah gave you victory over them 
when some of them were killed and others were 
taken captive. They should therefore wait for some¬ 
thing similar to happen if they return to their evil. 

Allah knows about His creation and what is best 
for them, and He is Wise in His handling of affairs. 

(jp Those who believed in Allah, accepted His Mes¬ 
senger, practised His sacred law, emigrated from 
the land of disbelief to the land of Islam, or to a 
place in which they can worship Allah safely, and 
strived in Allah’s path by spending their wealth and 
giving their lives to raise Allah’s Word, and those 
who hosted them in their homes and supported 
them - those emigrants and those locals who sup¬ 
ported them are friends of one another in terms of 
providing support and assistance. As for those who 
believed in Allah but did not emigrate from the land 
of disbelief to the land of Islam, you have no obli¬ 
gation, O believers, to support and protect them until they emigrate in Allah’s path. If the disbelievers oppress them and 
they seek your help, then help them against their enemies, unless there is a pact between you and their enemy that is still 
in place. Allah sees what you do. No action of yours is hidden from Him and He will repay you for them. 

@ The disbelievers are united in their disbelief and they therefore become friends of one another. A believer should not 
become friends with them. If you do not become friends with the believers and oppose the disbelievers, the believers will 
suffer weakness as a result of a lack of support and there will be great corruption on earth as people will be prevented 
from Allah’s path. 

@ Those who believed in Allah and emigrated in His path, and those who provided shelter and assistance to the emi¬ 
grants in Allah’s path, they are the ones who can be truly described as having faith. They will receive Allah’s forgiveness 
for their sins and a generous reward: Paradise. 

@ Those who believed and accepted the faith amongst the earlier Emigrants and Helpers, who emigrated from the land 
of disbelief to the land of Islam, and strived in Allah’s path so that Allah’s Word may be the highest and the word of the 
disbelievers may be the lowest - they are part of you, O believers. They will have the same rights and obligations as you 
have. 

Under Allah’s final sacred laws of inheritance, family members are closer to one another than the previous Islamic system 
of inheritance based on faith and emigration. 

Allah knows everything. Nothing is hidden from Him. He knows what is best for His servants and legislates what is in 
their well being. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The believers must encourage captives to accept faith. 2. The verses contain glad tidings for the believers that they will 
continue to be assisted against the idolaters as long as they hold on to the material and spiritual means for such assistance. 
3. If Muslims are not united against the people of disbelief their strength will not become apparent and great corruption 
will arise because of that. 4. Fulfilment of pledges and treaties holds great virtue in the Sacred Law of Islam, even if this 
is opposed to the interests of some Muslims. 5. When Muslims cooperate together they become powerful and can then 
defeat their enemies. 




. i _ 


Al-Anfal 


Part 10 


















Repentance (Surah Tawbah) 




UV 






VpLlo\£4r-^ Ajoji ^ 

j_9 4J±\ (V \ i £^C4 4J^\ t*^J 

jCZ^y oij 

^qj \ -Ax) 1^ ^ ujr^ ^ 

>4^ 144-^1 ^ ^ ^ 0 44<*' 

\y\t-j 'o^^\\J^j\j>\ 1> i yL=Ji^ l } \jj^3\^ 

aj^\3 J^\s?zX^\ty\^==3 / J^\ 

O^pjA &^\^C/^3c, ij$r£&\ 


® Themes of the Surah: 

It reveals the states of various groups: disassocia- 
tion of the disbelievers, exposure of the hypocrites 
and distinction of the believers. 

® Explanation: 

@ This is a declaration of dissociation from Allah 
and His Messenger and an announcement of the ter¬ 
mination of the treaties that you, O Muslims, had 
made with the idolaters. 

© So travel freely - O idolaters - on earth for a 
period of four months after which there will be no 
treaty nor any indemnity. Be certain that you will 
never escape Allah’s punishment and retribution if 
you continue to disbelieve in Him. Also be certain 
that Allah will humiliate the disbelievers, by their 
being killed or taken captive in the world, and by 
their entering the fire on the Day of Rising. This 
includes those who broke their treaties as well as 
those who had open treaties without any fixed peri¬ 
od. As for those with whom you made a treaty for a 
fixed period their treaty will be honoured until the 
end of the specified period, even if this is longer 
than four months. 

@ A notification from Allah and His Messenger to 
all people on the Day of Sacrifice that Allah, may 
He be glorified, and His Messenger are free of the 
idolaters. If you, O idolaters, repent from your idol¬ 
atry, then such repentance will be better for you. If 
you turn away from repentance, then be certain that 
you will never get away from Allah and you will 
never escape His punishment. O Messenger, give 
the disbelievers news that will upset them: the painful punishment that awaits them. 

@ The idolaters who are excluded from the previous ruling are those with whom you entered into a treaty and they hon¬ 
oured the treaty in full. So there will be a complete fulfilment of the treaty with them until the end of the period. Allah 
loves those who are mindful of Him by obeying His sacred law, which includes fulfilment of treaties, and by avoiding His 
prohibitions, which include the prohibition of treachery. @ With the ending of the sacred months (Dhu Al-Qa‘dah, Dhu 
Al-Hijjah, Muharram and Rajab), during which you assured your enemies of safety, kill the idolaters wherever you meet 
them. Besiege them in their fortresses and lie in wait for them on their paths. If they repent to Allah from their idolatry, 
establish the prayer and give the Zakat from their wealth, they become your brothers in Islam and you must not fight them 
any longer. Allah is Forgiving and Compassionate towards those of His servants who repent to Him. {Jj If any of the 
idolaters, whose blood and wealth is permissible, comes to you, O Messenger, and requests your protection, then accept 
their request so that they can listen to the Qur’an. Then take them to a place where they will be safe. That is because the 
disbelievers are a people who do not know the realities of this religion. When they come to know of it by listening to the 
recitation of the Qur’an, they may come on to the right path. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. There is a clear indication in the verses, that Islam necessitates making external relations with enemies based on peace, 
security and mutual understanding. 2. Islam values treaties and requires fulfilment of them. It regards the upholding of 
treaties to be a result of faith and a necessary element of Mindfulness. 3. It is permissible to enter into a truce, treaty 
and agreement with non-Muslims in order to realize certain interests if they adhere to the provisions contained therein. 
4. Keeping up the prayer and giving charity is an indication of being a Muslim. Doing such actions will protect life and 
wealth and will grant the person who does them the rights of Muslims in terms of the sanctity of their lives and wealth. 
This will apply unless Islam permits them as in the case of commission of a capital offence such as murder of an innocent 
person or treason. 5. The granting of protection and safety to a war enemy who requests it is permissible. This is so that 
they may learn about Islam. Such a law shows a high level of leniency and respect when dealing with disbelievers, and 
indicates that peace is a preferred way of acting for Muslims. 


Tawbah 


Part 10 
































o x-* f0** . fc. e,^ 

^A^lXjX 




■&’jk^ 


Up It is not correct for those who associate part¬ 
ners with Allah to have a treaty and an assurance of 
protection from Allah and His Messenger, except 
for the treaty you made with those idolaters at the 
Sacred Mosque in the Treaty of Al-Hudaybiyyah. 

As long as they uphold the treaty with you and do 
not break it, then you should also not break it. Al¬ 
lah loves those of His servants who are mindful of 
Him by fulfilling His instructions and avoiding His 
prohibitions. 

(SjS) How can they have a treaty with you and an 
assurance of protection when they are your ene¬ 
mies? If they gain the upper hand over you they 
will not be mindful of Allah in relation to you, nor 
will they respect any relationship or any treaty. In¬ 
stead, they will impose the worst punishment on 
you. They please you with fancy speech uttered 
by their tongues, but their hearts do not agree with 
their tongues. They will not fulfil what they prom¬ 
ise and most of them deviate from following Allah 
by breaking the treaty. 

(SjS) In order to satisfy their passions and desires, 
they took a trivial price of the things of this world 
in exchange for following Allah’s words, which in¬ 
cludes fulfilment of treaties. They prevented them¬ 
selves from following the truth and they turned 
away from it. They also prevented others from the 
truth. Such actions are most certainly evil. 

@ Due to their hatred, they do not have any consid¬ 
eration for Allah in how they deal with the believ¬ 
ers, nor do they respect any relationship or treaty. 

They overstep Allah’s limits because they are op¬ 
pressive and hostile. 

@ If they repent to Allah from their disbelief, pronounce the two declarations of faith, establish the prayer, give the Zakat 
of their wealth, then they will become Muslims and they will be your brothers in religion. They will then have the same 
rights and duties as you and it will not be lawful for you to fight them. Their acceptance of Islam will protect their lives, 
wealth and honour. Allah explains the verses clearly to a people who know, as they are the ones who will benefit from 
them and will cause others to benefit as well. 

@ If these idolaters, with whom you entered into a treaty not to fight for a set period, break their oaths and promises and 
insult your religion and attack it, then fight them, because they are the leaders of disbelief and there are no treaties or 
promises that can protect their lives. Fight them in the hope that they will stop their disbelief, violation of their treaties 
and speaking badly of the religion. 

@ Why do you, O believers, not fight a people who have broken their treaties and promises and who have attempted, 
in their meeting at Dar Al-Nadwah, to expel the Messenger (peace be upon him) from Makkah? They started the fight 
against you in the first place when they assisted the Children of Bakr, who were the allies of the Quraysh, against the 
Children of Khuza‘ah, who were the allies of the Messenger (peace be upon him). Is it because you are afraid of them 
that you do not go forward to fight them? It is Allah, may He be glorified, that you should fear, if you are truly believers. 
® Beneficial Points: 

1. The verses show that fighting against the idolaters who broke their treaty was due to many reasons, the most important 
of which was their breaking of the treaty. 2. The treaty that is respected by Allah and His Messenger is with those who do 
not break it. Any person who upholds his treaty will be treated accordingly. 

3. The verses contain proof that those who do not discharge the ritual prayer or the prescribed charity will be fought 
against until they discharge the same -as was done by Abu Bakr Al-Siddiq (may Allah be pleased with him.) 

4. Some scholars use the words ‘insult your religion’ as evidence that the person who deliberately insults and mocks the 
religion must be put to death. 

5. The verses indicate that the believer who fears Allah alone should be the bravest of all people in a fight. 


I 

dij 0 

^43 JLxx \jA^====&\ 4jL S \j 






















@ Fight then O believers, the idolaters, so that Al¬ 
lah may punish them by your hands by you killing, 
humiliating, defeating and capturing them. He also 
wants to help you making you overcome the idola¬ 
ters and to heal the hearts of a believing people who 
had not seen fighting, through the believers killing, 
capturing, defeating and overcoming their enemies. 
@ In this way, He will also remove the anger in 
the hearts of His believing servants by giving them 
victory. Allah turns in mercy to whomever He wills 
among those who were stubborn, if they repent to 
Him, asking for forgiveness. 

The last part of this verse describes the case of 
some of the people of Makkah on the day it was 
conquered by the Muslims. 

Allah knows the truth about those who repent to 
Him, and is Wise in His creation and His adminis¬ 
tration and law-giving. 

@ Do the believers think that Allah would leave 
them without testing them? Testing is one of Al¬ 
lah’s customs, and they will be tested until Allah 
clearly proves those who strive with sincerity for 
Him, who do not take protectors apart from Al¬ 
lah, His Messenger and the believers, and do not 
make intimate friends with the disbelievers. Allah 
is aware of everything you do - nothing is hidden 
from Him - and you will be repaid for your actions. 
@ It is not right for the idolaters to attend or care 
for Allah’s places of worship, worshipping in them, 
or doing good actions in them, while confirming 
their disbelief through their displaying of polythe¬ 
ism and the like. Their actions are wasted because 
they do not have faith, and faith is the condition for 
actions being accepted. On the Day of Judgement, they will enter the fire of Hell, living in it eternally, unless they repent 
from idolatry before their death. 

@ It is only right that places of worship should be supported and cared for by those who have faith in Allah alone, who 
do not associate partners with Him, who have faith in the Day of Judgement, who establish the prayer, and give the Zakat 
from their wealth, and who do not fear anyone except for Allah, glory be to Him. Such people will be guided to the right 
path, while the idolaters are the farthest away from it. 

@ Do the idolaters think that giving water to the pilgrims and caring for the Sacred Mosque is like someone who has faith 
in Allah, not associating any partners with Him, having faith in the Day of Judgement, striving with their self and their 
wealth to make the Word of Allah supreme, and the word of the disbelievers lowest? Do they consider them to be equal 
in virtue before Allah? They will never be equal before Allah, and Allah will not give success to those who do wrong by 
being idolaters, even if they do good actions, such as giving water to the pilgrims. 

@ Those who have faith in Allah and emigrate from the lands of disbelief to the lands of Islam, striving for Allah’s sake 
with their wealth and their selves, have the greatest rank with Allah. Such people will succeed in achieving what they 
desire, and avoiding what they fear. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1 The verses show the love of Allah for His believing servants, and His care for them in their different situations, making 
the aim of His sacred law the healing of what is in their breasts and the removal of their anger. 

2 The legislation of fighting to achieve this great aim, to make clear the true believers who are dedicated to the religion 
of Allah from those who are liars, and claim that they have faith. 

3 The rightful maintainers of places of worship are those who have true faith, and who do righteous deeds, among the 
most important of which are performing the prayer and giving the charity which is a duty, and who have awe of Allah, 
which is the root of all goodness. 

4 Striving for Allah’s sake and having faith in Him is much better than giving water to the pilgrim and maintaining the 
Sacred Mosque, because faith is the root of the religion, while striving for Allah’s sake is the highest level of this. 



£jc Q.)j: a I 

| 



m \ isr-W ( n £) \ 

j l 


Tawbah 

















@ Their Lord gives them good news to gladden 
their hearts, of His mercy and His contentment with 
them, so that He is never angry with them, and of 
entering them into gardens in which there is eternal 
bliss. 

((j) They will live in these gardens eternally as a 
reward for the good actions that they would do in 
the world. Allah has a great reward for those who 
follow what He instructs and who stay away from 
what He has prohibited, who lived in devotion to 
Him. 

@ O you who have faith in Allah and follow His 
Messenger, do not take your fathers and brothers, 
relatives and other relations, as intimates and pro¬ 
tectors, telling them the secrets of the believers and 
consulting them, if they prefer disbelief to faith in 
Allah alone. Whoever makes them protectors de¬ 
spite their disbelief, drawing close to them, diso¬ 
beys Allah, wrongs themselves and brings destruc¬ 
tion upon themselves because of their disobedience. 

(jp Say O Messenger to the believers, if their fa¬ 
thers, sons, brothers, wives and relatives, the wealth 
which they have gained, the trade which they want 
to grow and fear its reduction, and the houses which 
they like to live in are more beloved to them than 
Allah and His Messenger and striving for His sake, 
then they should wait for the punishment that Allah 
will send down upon them. Allah does not make 
it easy for those who disobey Him to do actions 
which please Him. 

(jP Allah helped the believers against their ene¬ 
mies, the idolaters, in many battles, despite their 
small numbers and shortage of weapons, when they 
trusted in Allah and took appropriate measures. The believers should not be simply pleased by being a great number, 
because this is not the reason for them beating their enemy. On the day of Hunayn, when they were pleased by their great 
numbers, they said that they would not be defeated on that day because of small numbers; but their great numbers which 
pleased them did them no good, with their enemies overcoming them, and the earth becoming narrow for them despite its 
vastness. Then they turned from their enemies, fleeing in defeat. 

(jP Then, after they ran away from their enemy, Allah sent down calm upon His Messenger and the believers, so that 
they became patient in fighting; and He sent angels they could not see, and punished the disbelievers with death, capture 
and seizure of their wealth, women and children. These disbelievers were repaid in this way for their rejection of the 
Messenger. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The great ranks of those who strive for Allah’s sake, for them is the highest rank before Allah among all those of rank, 
for them is the highest privilege and position, and they are successful, triumphant, and are saved, they are those who their 
Lord gives the good news of eternal bliss to. 

2. In the verses is the greatest proof of the necessity of love for Allah and His messenger, and the precedence of this love 
over the love of anything else. 

3. The special mention of the day of Hunayn among other battles, because it was an example of Allah’s help coming 
because of following the command of Allah and His messenger, peace be upon him, and defeat coming because of pre¬ 
ferring worldly pleasure to following them. 

4. The verses show that victory is only through Allah’s help, and not due to being great in number, since they did not 
triumph because of their great numbers. 

5. The blessing of the sending down of calm from Allah. The calm sent to the Messenger, peace and blessings be upon 
him, reassured him concerning the Muslims with him, and gave him certainty of Allah’s support, and the calm sent to the 
believers made them stand firm and gave them courage, after their anxiety and fear. 
























: A 


it\j i 

i -Xjb\ 




^ijLl$ ( ^ ) $ L^====*j^^L-^ ^T>J!^*L£> ^4 
<;^^ 4 ^ 5 \ 3^5 | 

I jAl?^wV/l>- 

p i>®uv oJif? ($) 

^1^01 JJl q^AsA^ J'Sj 


@ Then whoever rejects disbelief and misguidance 
after that affliction, Allah will accept their repent¬ 
ance. Allah is Forgiving and Merciful to those of 
His servants who repent to Him, accepting their 
repentance after their denial of the truth and their 
disobedience. 

{j} Those who have faith in Allah and His Messen¬ 
ger, and follow the sacred law that He established 
for them, are told that the idolaters are unclean be¬ 
cause of their disbelief, disobedience and blame¬ 
worthy character traits, and evil customs. So they 
were not to enter the sacred area of Makkah, con¬ 
taining the Sacred Mosque, as pilgrims for the Hajj 
or Umrah after that year, which was the ninth year 
of the Hijrah. If the believers fear poverty, because 
of the idolaters no longer bringing different foods 
and merchandise, Allah will be sufficient for them 
from His bounty, if He wills. Allah knows the situ¬ 
ation, and is Wise in His plan. 

@ Fight then O believers, against the disbelievers 
who do not have faith in Allah as their Lord without 
any partner, do not believe in the Day of Judgement, 
do not avoid what Allah and His Messenger have 
forbidden (such as carrion, the meat of pigs, alcohol 
and usury), and who do not submit themselves to 
what Allah has made sacred law, among the Jews 
and Christians - until they pay the jizyah tax with 
their own hands and are humble and subdued. 

(j|S) The Jews and the Christians associate partners 
with Allah: the Jews do so by claiming that ‘Uzayr 
is the son of Allah; and the Christians do so by 
claiming that the Messiah, Jesus, is the son of Al¬ 
lah. What they say with their own mouths is simply 
made up without any proof from Allah. By saying such things, they are similar to the idolaters before them, who said that 
the angels were the daughters of Allah. Allah is far above such things - may Allah destroy them! How can they turn away 
from the clear truth to falsehood? 

@ The Jews made their rabbis lords instead of Allah, as did the Christians with their monks, by allowing them to permit 
what Allah had forbidden them and forbidding what Allah had allowed for them; and the Christians made the Messiah, 
Jesus the son of Mary, a Allah next to Allah, as well as ‘Uzayr and Jesus the son of Mary, to worship Him alone, and not 
to associate anything with Him. He, glory be to Him, is the only Allah, and there is nothing worthy of worship except 
Him. He is, glory be to Him, sacred, far above having any partner that these idolaters and others claim. 

Beneficial Points: 

1. Some of the greatest blessings for the Muslims have been when their warring enemies have become Muslims too, as 
occurred with the Hawazin tribe and the Tartars. 

2. The verses show that the heart is allowed to be concerned with the ways of gaining provision and it is not contrary to 
relying on Allah. 

3. The verses show that provision is not due to effort, but is a blessing from Allah Who controls its distribution. 

4. The Jizyah tax is one of three choices Islam offers its enemies, and the aim of all three choices is to strengthen the 
Muslims and weaken the disbelievers. 

5. The Jews associated partners with Allah and did not recognise His greatness, glory be to Him! 

6. Allah encourages the believers to engage with the Jews and Christians on account of idolatry and lack of respect for 
the sacred laws. 



Tawbah 




















h^t 


£L\ 


J-^J >n£ Jfe* ($)oy^==t3 \ ^ =i ij-'Uy^. j 
0-^^ ^ls \ 0^=_^J ^^k= pff| 

l^^)j '<$ lW^-^ o p yWJ ^ 

*L\ii 




«§§• 


oILpoI^^ 

\j \ C^SJl 5^ \ 






Up The disbelievers from all the various religious 
groups who disbelieve by making up wrong beliefs 
and rejecting Muhammad (peace and blessings be 
upon him), wish to eradicate Islam. So they un¬ 
dermine the clear proofs establishing that there is 
only one Allah and that His Messenger has brought 
the truth. However, Allah will not allow anything 
to stop His sacred path being perfected and be¬ 
ing made clear. He will raise His Religion above 
everything else, even if the disbelievers hate that, 
and if Allah wills something, others are powerless 
to prevent it. 

(jjj) It is Allah, glory be to Him, Who sent His Mes¬ 
senger Muhammad (peace be upon him)with the 
Qur’an as the guidance for all people and the path 
of truth - establishing the religion of Islam - so as 
to raise it above all other religions through its proof, 
evidence and laws, even if the idolaters hate this. 

@ Those who believe in Allah and His Messenger, 
acting in obedience to the sacred law, are told that 
many of the Jewish rabbis and the Christian monks 
unjustly take the wealth of people, through things 
such as taking bribes, and prevent people from en¬ 
tering the path of Allah; they also collect gold and 
silver without purifying it by giving charity. The 
Messenger is told to inform them of the painful 
punishment that they will be given on the Day of 
Judgement. 

On the Day of Judgement, what they hoarded 
and did not give its right will be heated in the fire of 
Hell; and when it is greatly heated, it will be placed 
on their foreheads, sides and backs, then reheated 
when it cools, on a day lasting fifty thousand years. 

It will be said to them, by way of blame, that this is the wealth they hoarded for themselves, not paying the Zakat from 
it, or spending it in the way they were ordered; and they will be told to taste the evil consequences of what they hoarded 
and did not use correctly. 

There are twelve months of the year decreed by Allah, no more or less, which Allah established in the Preserved Tablet 
when He created the heavens and the earth. Of these twelve months, four are sacred, during which Allah has forbidden 
fighting. Three of them consecutive (Dhu Al-Qa 4 dah, Dhu Al-Hijjah and Muharram), and one is on its own (Rajab). The 
twelve months of the year, and respecting the sacredness of four of them, is the correct way of life. Allah tells the believ¬ 
ers not to wrong themselves during these sacred months by fighting, violating their sacredness. 

Also, the believers are instructed to fight the idolaters all together as they fight them all together, and to know that Allah 
is with those who are Mindful, who follow what He instructs and stay away from what He has prohibited, and He helps 
and supports them. If Allah supports anyone, no one will be able to defeat them. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The religion of Allah is apparent and victorious, no matter how its enemies may try to harm it out of their envy. 

2. The emergence of Islam over other ways took place in the world through many people from different parts of the world 
adopting it, despite the people and the leaders of their communities disliking this, and opposing it in any way they could. 

3. Unjustly using up the wealth of people is forbidden, as is preventing people from Allah’s way. 

4. Hoarding money without spending it for the sake of Allah is forbidden. 

5. The importance of being Mindful privately and publicly, especially when fighting against those who deny the truth, 
since the believer is mindful of Allah in every situation. 






>2lSU 


Huttos 


Tawbah 


Part 10 























@ Postponing the sacredness of the month of 
Muharram to another month, as the Arabs of the 
time of ignorance before Islam used to do, was 
another example of their disbelief and rejection of 
His laws. Satan led the disbelievers further astray 
through this, when he made them adopt this evil 
practice. They would declare a sacred month not 
to be sacred one year, exchanging it for one of the 
other months, and honoured its sacredness another 
year, making up the same number of months that 
Allah made sacred, but changing which months, 
in opposition to Allah’s law. Satan made their evil 
actions seems attractive to them so that they did 
them, and one such action was postponing sacred 
months through their invention. Allah does not give 
success to the disbelievers and those who persist in 
disbelief. 

O you who have faith in Allah and His Mes¬ 
senger, and follow His sacred law, what is wrong 
with you that when you are called to strive for Al¬ 
lah’s sake, fighting against your enemy, tyou be¬ 
come reluctant, desiring to remain in your houses. 
Do you prefer the passing life of this world and 
its pleasures, which are short-lived, to the eternal 
bliss of the Afterlife, which Allah has prepared for 
those who strive for His sake? The enjoyment of 
the life of this world is insignificant in comparison 
to that of the Afterlife. How can anyone with sense 
choose something passing over something eternal, 
or something miserable over something amazing? 

If you do not go forward, striving for the sake 
of Allah to fight against the enemy, Allah will re¬ 
pay you with defeat and humiliation, and He will 
replace you with another people who are devoted to Allah, who rush to fight when they are called to do so. You do not 
harm Him in any way by going against His command, because He has no need of you, while you are in need of Him. 
Allah has power over all things, nothing weakens Him, and it is easy for Him to make His path and His Prophet triumph 
without you. 

@ If you O believers, do not help the Messenger (peace be upon him) and respond to his call to strive for the sake of 
Allah, then Allah has already helped him when you were not with him; when the idolaters drove him away from Mecca 
with Abu Bakr as-Siddlq (may Allah be pleased with him), and the two of them hid in the cave of Thawr from the dis¬ 
believers who were chasing them. On that occasion, the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him) told his 
companion Abu Bakr, who was scared that the idolaters would discover him, not to worry, because Allah was with them, 
supporting and helping them. Allah sent down His reassurance and tranquility upon the heart of His Messenger, and sent 
angels which they could not see to support them, making the word of the idolaters the lowest, and the word of Allah the 
highest by aiding His Religion. Allah is Mighty in His essence, power and force - nothing can overcome Him - and He 
Wise in His planning, decree and laws. 

Beneficial Points: 

1. Practices that go against sacred law, which continue without being rejected, people stop seeing them as incorrect, and 
they may start thinking they are good practices. 

2. Not rallying for battle when called upon to do so is one of the great sins, which earns a firm punishment, because of 
the great harm it causes. 

3. The sending down of peace and security which Allah causes to enter the hearts is one of the perfect blessings of Allah 
to His servant in times of difficulty and fear, when hearts are confused. It comes according to someone’s understanding 
of the nature of their Lord, and their trust in His true promise, and according to their faith and courage. 

4. Even the best of believing servants feel grief, especially when they fear the loss of something for the general good. 


U \y*\«. 12($) 

^ Job 

& ^ ^ ^ , _, ^ jj 





























4J^\jAJLJ li ^-kit) S c Z == ^ J 

ij^\jJ^L^dSj\ O^^r^ri j^===Kj^ C^r/^ci UJtisIL^ ^ 

C^ 4J^ \^p(^6jJ^===={3jL^^p^O ^ 


o\ 


Slf* 


^-^r§ \ ^Jl^\j4 Ui\j ^jJ~ijl^ iyJ^\i^jJ0^Z^[ aj| 

1 .15 *($) _S^jo 4^43^44^ J 4 ^ 3 l 5 



Si* 


@ March forth O believers, striving for the cause 
of Allah in hardship and in ease, whether you are 
young or old, striving with your wealth and selves, 
because going out and striving with your wealth 
and your selves is of more benefit in the life of this 
world and in the Afterlife than sitting at home and 
becoming attached to your wealth and persons. If 
you truly know this, then be eager to obey. 

(S§p If the Prophet had called the hypocrites who 
asked for permission to stay behind to an easy 
reward and a journey that was not difficult, they 
would have followed him; but the distance he called 
them to cover to get to the enemy was too great for 
them, so they stayed behind. These hypocrites who 
asked for permission to stay behind would swear 
by Allah when the Prophet returned to them, saying 
that if they could have gone out to fight with them 
they would have done so. They destroy themselves 
by exposing themselves to Allah’s punishment, be¬ 
cause they stayed behind and then swore a lie. Of 
course, Allah knew they were lying in what they 
claimed and in what they swore. 

@ May Allah forgive the Messenger for his deci¬ 
sion to permit them to stay behind! Why did he do 
so before it became apparent to him who had real 
excuses and who was lying? Then he could have 
excused those who were telling the truth, not those 
who were lying. 

@ It is not the characteristic of those who truly 
have faith in Allah and the Day of Judgement to 
ask the Messenger (peace be upon himjfor permis¬ 
sion to stay behind from striving for Allah’s sake 
with their wealth and their selves. Rather, it is their 
characteristic to rally when they are called to fight, and to strive with their wealth and their persons. Allah knows those 
among His servants who are Mindful, who do not ask to be excused except for genuine reasons that really prevent them 
from going with the Messenger. @ Those who ask the Messenger (peace be upon himjfor permission to stay behind from 
striving for the sake of Allah are the hypocrites who do not believe in Allah and the Day of Judgement, and whose hearts 
are full of doubt about the sacred path of Allah. In their doubt they waver, confused, and they are not guided to the truth. 
@ If they had been telling the truth in their claim that they wanted to go out with the Messenger (peace be upon him), 
striving for the sake of Allah, they would have made preparations for it; but Allah did not want them to go with the 
Prophet, and stopped them from doing so. They were disgraced because they were told to stay behind with those who 
were ordered to stay behind, such as the women, children and the sick. Due to the fact that the believers might have been 
upset that the hypocrites were staying behind, Allah put their minds at ease, saying that if they had gone with them they 
would have actually caused more harm than by staying behind: @ It was a blessing that these hypocrites did not go with 
them, because if they had gone they would only have increased them in problems: demoralising people and making them 
doubt, hurrying between their lines, spreading rumours to divide them. Some of the believers would listen to such lies, 
believing and repeating them, causing arguments amongst them. Allah knows the wrongdoers among the hypocrites, who 
try to spread conspiracies and doubts among the believers. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. A person has a duty to strive with their body and wealth whenever there is a need. 2. True worship only occurs with 
sincerity and following what is instructed, no matter what the situation. Those who do this are honoured by Allah. 

3. Fighting for the sake of Allah has a great reward, leading to one of two good things: either victory, raising the word 
of Allah and making the Muslims strong, or being martyred for the sake of Allah, ensuring the bliss of the Afterlife and 
the enjoyment of being in Paradise eternally. 4. False oath brings about ruin. 5. The importance of not being too hasty, 
and of making sure of things, taking the time to consider them, not being deceived by the way things seem, scrutinising 
and checking them. 6. Those who have faith in Allah and the Last Day do not ask to be excused from striving with their 
wealth and their selves. 7. Preventing the hypocrites from going out with the believers was a way that Allah took care 
of the believers, as a mercy and kindness, so that those who would harm them did not accompany and mix with them. 






Tawbah 


Part 10 
























\\0 




\ \y\-ij (J4 3 iyt£-L a}\ j^jCjT x& 
j\j\j]aj L io 3it 0 * 

a * , 




JS0 

i^ £ i}\s~S^y > _j A lift 





These hypocrites had already tried to cause 
trouble by creating division amongst the believers 
before the Battle of Tabuk, by making things diffi¬ 
cult for the Messenger (peace be upon him) through 
their schemes and plots, so that they might affect 
the Prophet’s determination to fight. This was un¬ 
til the help and support of Allah arrived, and He 
strengthened His path and overcame His enemies, 
although they hated this, because they wanted what 
was false to overcome the truth. 

@ Among the hypocrites were those who used var¬ 
ious excuses, asking the Prophet (peace and bless¬ 
ings be upon him) to permit them to stay behind 
from fighting, for fear of being tested by the women 
of the Roman enemy and hence falling into sin. But 
they fell into a greater sin than the one they claimed 
they feared: the sin of hypocrisy, and staying be¬ 
hind. On the Day of Judgement, Hell will surround 
the disbelievers, none of them escaping it or getting 
away from it. 

{j§5 If the Messenger of Allah receives a blessing 
from Allah that pleases him, such as victory or 
some gains, they dislike this, and it grieves them. If 
a misfortune befalls him in the form of some hard¬ 
ship or loss in battle, these hypocrites say that they 
had taken precautions for themselves, making the 
right decision when they did not go out to fight as 
the believers did, which led to them being killed 
or captured. They, then, turn away to their people, 
rejoicing in their own safety. 

O Messenger, tell these hypocrites: ‘Nothing 
will afflict us except what Allah has written for us, 
He is our Protector, the one whom we take refuge 
in, and we put our trust in Him in all our affairs. Let the believers place their trust in Him for He is sufficient for them 
and the best of guardians. 

@ O Messenger, say to them: ‘Are you waiting for anything other than victory or martyrdom to befall us - which are 
both good outcomes - while we expect Allah to send down a misfortune upon you: a punishment from Allah which would 
destroy you, or that you are punished at our hands with either death or being captured, if Allah permits us to fight against 
you? Wait to see then what our outcome will be, for we are also waiting to see your outcome.’ 

@ Tell them O Messenger,: ‘Spend of your wealth willingly or unwillingly, for it will not be accepted from you because 
of your disbelief and disloyalty to Allah.’ 





1 0 



Tawbah 


(jp What the hypocrites spend in charity will not be accepted from them due to three matters: their disbelief in Allah and 
His Messenger; their reluctance and lack of interest in praying; and not spending their wealth willingly, but only unwill¬ 
ingly - because they do not expect to get any benefit from their prayer, or from what they spend. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The hypocrites are devoted to trying to cause harm to the Muslims through scheming and spying. 

2. Staying behind from striving for the sake of Allah is a great tribulation, and is disloyalty to Allah and to His Messenger. 

3. In the verses, the Muslims are taught not to be grievous about what afflicts them, so that they do not become weak and 
lose hope; and that they should accept Allah’s decree for them, and hope for the pleasure of their Lord, because surely 
Allah wants His Religion to be victorious. 

4. Entrusting everything to Allah, after taking appropriate measures, is one of the foundations of faith. 

5. One of the signs of weak faith is being lazy in the performance of the prayer and in spending charity, due to a lack of 
desire and hope for the reward these actions bring. 

























@ So do not be impressed by the wealth and chil¬ 
dren of these hypocrites, or think it to be something 
good. The end result of their wealth and children 
will be grievous: Allah will make them a form of 
punishment for the hypocrites, causing them dif¬ 
ficulty and hardship, and send misfortune through 
them until Allah takes their souls while they still 
disbelieve; and are given an eternal punishment in 
the lowest depths of the fire of Hell. @ The hyp¬ 
ocrites swear to the believers, lying to them, that 
they are with them, when they are secretly not, al¬ 
though they make it look as if they were. But they 
are a scared people, cowards in fighting, and fear 
that what happened to the idolaters who were killed 
and captured will happen to them, so they pretend 
to be Muslim. If these hypocrites find a shelter, 

such as a fort, to protect themselves in, or caves in 
the mountains to hide in, or an underground tunnel 
they could go into to shelter in, they would rush 
away immediately, (jp Among the hypocrites are 
those who criticise the Messenger for how he dis¬ 
tributes charity. If they are given what they want 
from it, they are happy with the Messenger; but if 
he does not give them what they want from it, they 
start to complain. @ If only these hypocrites who 
criticize you in the distribution of charity had been 
pleased with their portion that Allah had assigned 
for them and with what the Messenger gave them, 
saying: ‘Allah is sufficient for us and He will grant 
us more from His Grace, and the Messenger will 
also give us from what Allah has given him, and 
we ask Allah alone to enrich us!’-had they said this 
it would have been better for them then criticising 
the Messenger. After the hypocrites blamed the Messenger in the distribution of the charity, Allah mentioned the correct 
avenues in which the obligatory charity should be spent and who has a right to it, as a means of defending his Messenger: 
@) Obligatory charity should be distributed to: 1) the poor, those who hardly own anything and this is not hidden from 
people, either because of the obvious distress of their situation or because of what they tell people about their problems 
2) the needy who have some money from working, but not enough for them to live well, whose situation is not drawn 
attention to; 3) those employed and sent by the Imam to collect it 4) disbelievers, as a sign of friendship, in order to bring 
them closer to Islam, and those of weak faith, so as to strengthen their faith and prevent evil 5) freeing captives 6) people 
in debt - who find themselves in debt due to reasonable conditions and not because of extravagance - if they cannot find a 
way of repaying their debts 7) those striving for the sake of Allah and 8) the traveller who has run out of money. Limiting 
the distribution of zakat to these people is a duty established by Allah. Allah knows what is in the best interests of His 
servants, Wise in His planning and law-making. @ Among the hypocrites are those who hurt the Messenger of Allah 
(peace be upon him) through their words, saying, because of his great kindness, that he listens to everyone and believes 
whatever they say, and does not distinguish between what is true and what is not. The Messenger (peace be upon him) is 
told to say to them that he only listens to what is best for them. He has faith in Allah and believes what the believers tell 
him. Those who harm the Messenger (peace be upon him), in any way, will receive a painful punishment. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Wealth and children can be reasons for suffering in this world, and for suffering in the Afterlife, so the believer should 
treat them in a way that is pleasing to Allah, in order to gain salvation through them. 2. A believer should make his desires 
in accordance to what is pleasing to Allah. 3. Had all the wealthy Muslims paid their obligatory charity there would not 
remain a single poor person, and there would be enough wealth whereby the frontiers could be defended and the enemies 
of Islam fought, and whereby many matters of the religion may have been rectified. 4. Zakat is given for distribution 
by those in charge of society, who make decisions about the needs of the different categories of people and the money 
available for that. 5. Harming the Messenger (peace be upon him) in a way related to his message is disbelief, which 
leads to a serious punishment. 6. The believer should listen to what is good and not listen to what is evil. In other words 
he should be keen to listen to what is beneficial and good, and turn away from listening to what is sinful and corrupt. 




HI 




0 

<V' “Cf ^ ^ 2 ^ ^ t> S'99 *+ 

54 } jZjjJ 




A vAf \ 1 

** ^ ^* y' 



Tawbah 


Part 10 




















@ The hypocrites swear by Allah to you, O believ¬ 
ers, that they did not say anything to hurt the Proph¬ 
et (peace be upon him). They do this so that you 
may become pleased with them; but Allah and His 
Messenger are more deserving of being pleased by 
their accepting faith and performing good actions, 
if they are truly believers. 

Do these hypocrites not know that by their do¬ 
ing such actions they are opposing Allah and His 
Messenger; and that whoever opposes Allah and 
His Messenger will enter the fire of Hell on the Day 
of Judgement, to live there eternally? That is the 
worst disgrace and humiliation. 

@ The hypocrites are afraid that Allah will reveal 
a surah to His Messenger that will inform the be¬ 
lievers about the disbelief that they conceal. Say, O 
Messenger: Continue, O hypocrites, mocking and 
poking fun. Allah will unveil what you are afraid of 
by revealing a surah or by informing His Messen¬ 
ger about the truth of your case. 

@ If you, O Messenger, ask the hypocrites about 
the insults they used against the believers after Al¬ 
lah informs you of it, they will say, ‘We were just 
joking when we said that and we were not serious’. 
Say, O Messenger, ‘Is it Allah, His verses and His 
Messenger that you were making fun of?’ 

Do not present these false excuses, O hypo¬ 
crites. You have exposed your disbelief, which was 
hidden, by making fun. If I were to pardon a group 
from among you, when they leave their hypocrisy 
and repent from it by sincerely repenting to Allah, 
I will punish another group from among you due 
to their remaining in hypocrisy and their failure to 


repent from it. 

@ The hypocrites, men and women, are all the same with respect to their states of hypocrisy. They are not like the be¬ 
lievers, because they call to evil and prohibit good. They are also miserly with their wealth and do not spend it in Allah’s 
path. They turned away from Allah and were unmindful of Him, and they only remember Allah a little. Allah therefore 
left them out of His mercy. The hypocrites are the ones who deviate from following Allah and the path of truth by going 
towards sin and the path of misguidance. 

{jS> Allah has promised the hypocrites and the disbelievers who do not repent that He will make them enter the fire of Hell 
to live there eternally - it is a sufficient punishment for them. Allah has distanced them from His mercy and for them is 
an everlasting punishment. 

Beneficial Points: 

1. The hypocrites committed many bad actions, including their willingness to take false oaths, opposition to Allah and 
His Messenger, making fun of the Qur’an, the Prophet and the believers, being afraid that a surah would be revealed in 
the Qur’an exposing their reality and their making excuses that they were only joking and playing around when they were 
insulting the religion. Such excuses proved they were guilty of disbelief and the excuse was worse than the offence itself. 

2. Joking about Islam or any of its laws is never acceptable, and speaking in such a manner about Allah’s Book, His 
messengers and His attributes is considered disbelief. 

3. Repentance from hypocrisy or disbelief is accepted by Allah. Whoever repents shall be pardoned; but whoever persists 
in disbelief or hypocrisy shall be punished in Hell. 



















@ O hypocrites, in your disbelief and mockery you 
are like the communities of disbelievers before you. 

They were greater than you in strength, and had 
more wealth and children, and they enjoyed their 
allotted share of the luxuries and pleasures of this 
world. You, O hypocrites, also enjoyed your allot¬ 
ted share of the world, just as the communities of 
the past did. You indulged in denying the truth and 
insulting the messenger just as they did. 

Those who have these shameful qualities will have 
their actions reduced to nothing by Allah due to 
their disbelief. They are the losers, whose own 
souls have brought them to the point of destruction. 

@ Have the hypocrites not heard of what previous 
disbelieving communities did and what their end 
was? The news of the people of Noah, Hud, Salih, 

Abraham, the inhabitants of Madyan and the towns 
of the nation of Lot? Their messengers came to 
them with clear proof and evidence. Allah was not 
unjust in punishing them, as their messengers had 
warned them, but they were unjust to themselves 
because of their disbelief in Allah and rejection of 
His messengers. 

(SjS The believers, men and women, are helpers 
to one another, because of the faith that unites 
them. They command good - which is everything 
loved by Allah, represented by the various forms 
of obedience, such as accepting His Oneness and 
the ritual prayer - and they prohibit evil - which is 
everything hated by Allah, and includes sins such as 
disbelief and dealing in usury in financial transac¬ 
tions. They perform the ritual prayer in a complete 
manner, and they obey Allah and His Messenger. 

People with these praiseworthy qualities will receive Allah’s mercy. Allah is Mighty and nothing can overcome Him. He 
is Wise in His creating, handling of matters and establishment of laws. 

@) Allah has promised those men and women who have faith in Him that He will enter them, on the Day of Judgement, 
into gardens with rivers flowing beneath their palaces, where they will live eternally. In these gardens, they will not die 
and their delight will never end. Yet the pleasure that Allah will give to them will be greater than all of that. This reward 
is the great success which no other success can equal. 

4*} Beneficial Points: 

1. Hypocrisy is a deep-rooted chronic illness in human beings. Those suffering from this illness in every age resemble 
each other in their commanding of evil and prohibition of good, and their failure to spend in Allah’s path on those things 
that they are required to spend on. 

2. The final repayment by Allah matches the action performed by the servant. The person who fails to obey Allah’s in¬ 
structions and commits His prohibitions is left out of Allah’s mercy. 

3. The reason for the punishment of disbelievers and hypocrites is the same in all eras: their preferring and enjoying the 
pleasures of this world over the Afterlife, and the rejection of, plotting against and being treacherous towards the proph¬ 
ets. 

4. In the destruction of communities and nations of the past, because of their disbelief and rejection of the prophets, is a 
lesson and warning for those intelligent people who take lessons. 

5. Punishment from Allah only happens because of a sin committed by a person. 

6. The people of faith, men and women, are one united nation who co-operate and support each other. Their hearts are 
united and filled with mutual love and compassion. 

7. The pleasure of the Lord of the earth and the heavens is greater than the luxuries of Paradise, because spiritual happi¬ 
ness is superior to physical happiness. 























J j[jd===^\ \ Qj>\3j 

o ^ **^ ^ i£^ ^ ■> 

]y \iU 4lilj ® 44-i?43 
l^jJ^Jjj[jJcl £a^=£j 2^A^=J\Ji \| J3Vj 

^ \3jrt 0§J >4 Ia=- iio \44i tl)^ 4i-4? Cr5 

Col x 3^ 4ji\ ^^344^5 * ($L>i-4 )S ^ o 4o o^ 

2 \ ^ 0 ^ r> ^ _ ^ 

j AjyAo ^ ^ 1 jL&j& ^ (^) OjS^Jf^ 

<$)oj_o3° jisju atyiff^ 


© O Messenger, strive against the disbelievers by 
fighting against them with the sword, and strive 
against the hypocrites with well-expressed argu¬ 
ments. Be hard with both groups because that is 
what they deserve. Their resting place on the Day 
of Judgement will be Hell. What an evil place they 
will end up in! 

© The hypocrites swear a false oath by Allah that 
they did not say the words of insults about you and 
your religion that have reached you. But they did 
say those things which showed them to be disbe¬ 
lievers after they had announced that they have 
faith. They had intended to assassinate the Prophet 
(peace be upon him), but were unsuccessful. 

They only disliked something that should not have 
been disliked!: that Allah had graciously favoured 
the Prophet and the believers by blessing them with 
the gains of war. If they turn to Allah and repent 
from their hypocrisy, their repentance will be better 
for them than remaining in their hypocrisy. Yet if 
they do not repent to Allah, He will punish them 
§*■ with a painful punishment in this world, by hav- 
^ ing them killed or taken prisoner, and He will also 
punish them in the Afterlife in the fire of Hell, and 
they will not have anyone to save them from the 
punishment. 

© Some of the hypocrites have made a promise 
with Allah, saying: If Allah gives us from His boun¬ 
ty, we will certainly give charity to the poor and 
we will be of the righteous ones whose actions are 
good. 

© When Allah, may He be glorified, gave them 
from His bounty, they did not fulfil the promise 
they made with Him. Instead, they became miserly and did not give any charity, and they turned away from accepting 
the faith with hatred. 

© Allah therefore firmly established hypocrisy in their hearts until the Day of Judgement, as a punishment for their 
breaking their promise with Allah and for their lying. 

© Do the hypocrites not know that Allah knows the plots they keep secret in their meetings and that Allah, may He be 
glorified, is the Knower of all Ghaib things? No action of theirs is hidden from Him and He will repay them for that. 
© Those who find fault with the believers who voluntarily give a little charity, who only find a little that they are able 
to give, and they poke fun at them - saying: Of what use is their charity? - Allah mocks them in return for their mocking 
the believers; and they will receive a painful punishment. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. It is an obligation to strive against the disbelievers and hypocrites: striving against the disbelievers physically, with all 
available means of warfare and striving against the hypocrites with well-formed arguments. 

2. The hypocrites are the worst people, because they are treacherous and they return good treatment with evil. 

3. The verses indicate that the breaking of a pledge or promise creates hypocrisy. It is therefore necessary that Muslims 
try their best to honour such agreements. 

4. The verses praise having a strong body and good work, which can take the place of wealth. This is an important prin¬ 
ciple when considering public wealth and honouring the status of the labourer. 




.if " 




UjjS>zu^3 


Tawbah 


199 






















@ Allah will never forgive the hypocrites, even if 
the Messenger was to ask for their forgiveness, be¬ 
cause they do not deserve to be forgiven, nno mat¬ 
ter how much forgiveness is sought for them. They 
disbelieved in Allah and His Messenger and they 
deliberately oppose Allah’s sacred law. 

@ Those hypocrites who failed to join the battle of 
Tabuk were happy not to strive in Allah’s path, in 
opposition to the Messenger of Allah. They were 
reluctant to strive with their wealth and live in Al¬ 
lah’s path as the believers did. They said to their 
fellow hypocrites, in order to keep them behind, 

‘Do not march in the heat! ’ The battle of Tabuk was 
during the hot season. Say to them, O Messenger: 

The fire of Hell that awaits the hypocrites is much 
hotter than this heat that they are running away 
from, if they only knew. 

@ Let these hypocrites, who failed to strive in Al¬ 
lah’s path, laugh a little in their temporary life of 
the world and let them cry much in their everlasting 
life of the Afterlife in return for the disbelief and 
sins they committed in the world. 

@ If Allah returns you, O Prophet, to a group of 
these hypocrites who are firm in their hypocrisy 
and they ask you for permission to go out with you 
in another battle, then say to them: You, hypocrites, 
will never go out with me in Allah’s path, as a pun¬ 
ishment for you and a means of avoiding the harms 
that may arise due to your presence with me. You 
were quite pleased to remain behind in the battle of 
Tabuk, so stay with those sick persons, women and 
children who remain behind. 

@ Do not offer the prayer, O Messenger, over any 
one of the hypocrites who dies; and do not stand to pray for forgiveness at their gravesides. That is because they disbe¬ 
lieved in Allah and His Messenger, and they died whilst they had left Allah’s obedience. No prayer should be offered for 
such a person. 

{§> Do not, O Messenger, let the wealth and children of these hypocrites impress you. Allah only intends to punish them 
with that in the life of the world, through the difficulties they face and the disasters they are afflicted with respect to them, 
and that their souls leave their bodies while they are in disbelief. 

jjj) When Allah reveals a surah to His Prophet (peace be upon him) that contains the instruction to have faith in Allah and 
to strive in His path, the rich people from among them ask you for permission to stay behind and they say: Let us stay 
behind with those who are excused, such as the weak and those who are chronically ill. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Asking forgiveness and doing good actions will not benefit the disbelievers as long as they remain as disbelievers. 

2. The joy of the hypocrites will soon disappear and only crying will remain. 

3. The verses indicate the short sightedness of people as they generally look at the present situation they are in and they 
do not look at the future occurrences that are still to come. 

4. The verses do not indicate that a little laughter is forbidden, but consistently laughing a lot causes the heart to die. 

5. The verses contain evidence for the legitimacy of offering the funeral prayer over believers, visiting their graves and 
praying for them after their death, just as the Prophet (peace be upon him) used to do for the believers. 

6. One should not be deceived in this world by the wealth and children that Allah has given the disbelievers and hypo¬ 
crites, because they are not an honour for them but are a way to deceive and entice them to their destruction. 















09 ^ 









Tawbah jtm 


200 


Part 10 























HiAj 





2) 




u y 


yj£^y 1?j^- 

| ^_$^>-^>j^Jr »-l3 <Lfc\ jLft tiA-^3 %\j 

(£)i \ (iil'3 ■> 

^ (J^L? &lij*-^^(Jp l _p^^J>^ 

3 \ i^- c ' v ^j 




j_j-«0_J 4ji.]_pc^aJ b 

v-e 



jgS> These hypocrites are pleased with disgrace and 
humiliation, since they are pleased to stay behind 
with those who are excused. Allah has sealed their 
hearts because of their disbelief and hypocrisy, so 
they do not know where their best interests are. 
They are therefore similar to animals. 

(jj) The Messenger and the believers with him did 
not remain behind from striving in Allah’s path, as 
these people did. Instead, they strived in Allah’s 
path with their wealth and their lives. Their reward 
from Allah is that they will receive worldly ben¬ 
efits, such as victory and gains of war, as well as 
benefits in the Afterlife, which includes entry into 
Paradise and successful attainment of their desires 
and salvation from what they fear. 

@ Allah has prepared for these believers gardens 
with rivers flowing beneath their palaces, where 
they shall live eternally. That reward is the great 
success that cannot be equalled by any other. 

A group of people from the desert Arabs of 
Medina and the surrounding areas came with ex¬ 
cuses to Allah’s Messenger (peace be upon him), 
so that he would give them permission to remain 
behind from going out and striving in Allah’s path. 
Another group of people who did not even make 
any excuse also stayed behind from going out be¬ 
cause they did not accept the Prophet and they did 
not have faith in Allah’s promise. A painful pun¬ 
ishment will afflict these people because of their 
disbelief. 

@ There is no sin on women, children, the sick, the 
disabled who are chronically ill or blind, and the 
poor who do have any wealth to spend in order to 
equip themselves for remaining behind from going out, since they have valid excuses, as long as they are sincere to Allah 
and His Messenger and they practise His sacred law. Punishment will not fall on those who do good from among these 
people who are excused. Allah forgives the sins of those who do good and shows them mercy. 

® There is likewise no sin on those who stay behind from you after coming to you, O Messenger, asking you to give 
them an animal to ride and you said to them, ‘I do not have any animal to give you to ride’. They then turned away from 
you with their tears flowing out of sorrow that they could not find anything to spend of their own or from your side. 

(S§p There will only be punishment and blame on those who ask you, O Messenger, for permission to remain behind from 
striving while they are able to do so, due to their having the means to equip themselves. They are pleased with disgrace 
and humiliation for themselves by staying behind with those who remain behind at home. Allah has sealed their hearts so 
they are not affected by any warning. Because of this, they do not know where their best interests lie, so they can choose 
that; or where there is harm, so they can avoid it. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Those who strive in Allah’s path will receive the good things of this world. If they do not get this world, they will gain 
Paradise and salvation from the punishment in the Afterlife. 

2. In principle, those who do good to people out of kindness will not be taken to task if they fall short. 

3. Those who intend to do good, and together with this firm intention they strive to do what they can, but are unable to do 
so, will be in the rank of those who actually did that good action. 

4. Islam is a religion of justice and logic. For this reason, Islam has imposed punishment and sin on the hypocrites who 
ask for permission to not strive with their lives and wealth in the path of Allah while they are wealthy and able. 


I ty&zLA*, 

























Y * Y 






I l \ i L*LsC) Ipjj xS^c | 

£ -- ,- ^ 


-i-j? 


LujUd< 






jJUVj tyjaij f^x£\ 0 1 

3^j ($1 ^-^==r^>_Ac- (Jpl Li 




Cj^30%-^^ir-^ <$J i^_^C^jVjji\ 



@ The hypocrites who stayed behind from striv¬ 
ing in Allah’s path will present weak excuses to the 
Muslims when they return from their battle. Allah 
directs His Prophet and the believers to respond to 
them by saying: Do not make false excuses. We 
will never accept what you tell us because Allah 
has informed us about the excuses you make up. 

Allah and His Messenger will soon see whether you 
repent, in which case Allah will accept your repent¬ 
ance, or if you will persist in your hypocrisy. Then 
you will be returned to Allah, the One Who knows 
everything, and He will inform you about what you 
used to do and repay you for that. So rush towards 
repentance and good actions. 

@ Those who stay behind will swear by Allah 
when you, O believers, return to them, in order 
to strengthen their false oaths, so that you do not 
blame them. Therefore leave them alone and ignore 
them. They are filthy and impure from the inside. 

They will end up in Hell, as a repayment to them for 
their hypocrisy and the sins they committed. 

(jp) Those who stay behind will swear to you, O 
believers, so that you become pleased with them 
and accept their excuses. Do not become pleased 
with them. If you become pleased with them you 
would go against your Lord, because He will not be 
pleased with people who have left His obedience by 
disbelief and hypocrisy. So be careful, O Muslims, 
of becoming pleased with those whom Allah is not 
pleased with. 

@ If the people of the desert are of those who adopt 
disbelief or hypocrisy, then their disbelief and hy¬ 
pocrisy is stronger than that of others who live in 
city areas. They are also more likely to be ignorant of religion and the obligatory and recommended acts of the sacred 
law that Allah has revealed to His Messenger. This is because of their lack of culture, their harshness, and their lack of 
interacting with others. Allah knows about their condition. Nothing is hidden from Him. He is Wise is in His handling of 
matters and establishment of laws. 

(jp) Some of the desert hypocrites consider whatever wealth they spend in Allah’s path to be a loss and a punishment, 
because they think that there will be no reward for spending and that Allah will not punish them if they do not spend. De¬ 
spite this, they sometimes spend to show off and to hide their real beliefs. They wait for evil to come to you, O believers, 
so that they can be rid of you. Instead, But Allah has made the evil and the mm of fortune that they wished to afflict the 
believers to occur on them instead. Allah hears what they say and knows what they keep hidden in their hearts. 

(jp) Yet some of those who live in the desert have faith in Allah and the Day of Judgement and they consider any wealth 
they spend in Allah’s path as a means of gaining closeness to Allah, and of receiving the prayer of the Messenger (peace 
be upon him) and his asking forgiveness for them. Without doubt, their spending in Allah’s path and the prayer of the 
Messenger are means of gaining closeness to Allah; and they will find their reward with Allah when He enters them into 
His mercy, with His forgiveness and His Paradise. Allah is Forgiving and Compassionate towards those of His servants 
who repent to Him. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The field of action and obligations is the best witness to expose the lies of the hypocrites. 

2. The hypocrites are filthy and impure and it is necessary to stay away from them and not to have any love for them or 
be pleased with them. 

3. When the people of the desert do not have faith, they are stronger in their disbelief and hypocrisy than people of the 
city, due to the effect of their harsh and uncivilised environment. 

4. The verses encourage spending in Allah’s path with a sincere intention and it mentions the great reward for doing so. 

5. The verses indicate the virtue of knowledge and that the person who lacks knowledge is more likely to commit mis¬ 
takes. 


w 





















■AC^ 



\Xj>\ 

<q o^c>J \ ~3j^ ■ <^Vi 

JfiiJXjc^ L§\jjji \ <^P )j ^y° j^-C3 \ 

ofe cgpj&l&z U&z 


Uni^SL^^lai^-cl)_^i>-\ {^yJ^aP 
J^jyip 4 ji\ oL^4^ ^Jrt£^ ^ ^ c5^ 

\ oe-^-0 


X^ai \ JX\jj ^d iC&Cf- 4^i( J^SjJa 4jilT 
'4ji\ J3j (£) jLja£^\v^* 3' 

^ ♦ / j^’' . ♦ l -O' ^ ^ ^ ^ O 

lX^\j j-^JJ 

0jL^^jL^^\5 j^x^ui 


J? 




) The leaders in faith - in terms of having good 
belief, words and actions - from among the Emi¬ 
grants who left their homes migrating to Allah, and 
from among the Helpers who assisted His Messen¬ 
ger (peace be upon him), and those who followed 
the Emigrants and Helpers, Allah is pleased with 
them and He has accepted their actions. They are 
also pleased with Him because of the great reward 
that He is to give them: He has prepared for them 
gardens with rivers flowing beneath their palaces, 
where they shall live eternally. That reward is the 
great success. 

(@ Some of those who live in the desert surround¬ 
ing Medina are hypocrites, as are some of the peo¬ 
ple of Medina. They are firm and staunch in their 
hypocrisy. You, O Messenger, do not know them, 
but it is Allah Who knows them. Allah will punish 
them twice: once in this world by exposing their 
hypocrisy and by their being killed and taken cap¬ 
tive, and again in the Afterlife when they will be 
punished in the grave. Then they will receive, on 
the Day of Judgement, a great punishment in the 
lowest level of the fire of Hell. 

@1 There are others from among the people of 
Medina who stayed behind from the battle without 
any valid excuse. They then confessed that they had 
no excuse and they did not present false excuses. 
They have mixed their prior good actions of fol¬ 
lowing Allah, obeying His sacred laws and striving 
in His path with an evil action; yet they hope that 
Allah will accept their repentance and pardon them. 
Allah is Forgiving and Compassionate towards 
those of His servants who repent to Him. 

Take, O Messenger, zakat from their wealth, so that you can purify them from the uncleanliness of sins and evil ac¬ 
tions, and by which you can increase their good actions. Pray for them after taking it from them, because your prayer is a 
means of comfort and mercy for them. Allah hears your prayer and knows about their actions and intentions. 

(jf| Those who had stayed behind from striving in Allah’s path and who have repented to Allah should know that Allah 
accepts the repentance of His servants; and that He accepts charity, even though He is in no need of it, and rewards those 
who give charity. They should know that Allah, may He be glorified, is the One Who accepts repentance and is Compas¬ 
sionate towards those servants of His who repent to Him. Say, O Messenger, to those who had stayed behind from 
striving in Allah’s path and who have repented from their sin: : Make up for the harm caused by what you missed and be 
sincere in your actions to Allah. Do what pleases Him, because Allah, His Messenger and the believers will soon see your 
actions. Then you will be returned, on the Day of Judgement, to your Lord, the One Who knows everything. He knows 
what you hide and what you make public and He will inform you about what you used to do in the world and repay you 
for that. HI There are others from among those who stayed behind from the battle of Tabuk who did not have any valid 
excuse. The matter of these people has been deferred to Allah’s decree and His decision in their regard. Allah will decide 
about them as He wishes: He will either punish them if they do not repent to Him, or He will accept their repentance if 
they do. Allah knows who is deserving of His punishment and who deserves His pardon. Allah is Wise in His establish¬ 
ment of laws and handling of affairs. 

These people were Murarah ibn Al-RabT 4 , Ka‘b ibn Malik and Hilal ibn Umayyah. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The verses show the virtue of the Emigrants and Helpers over other people. 2. The verses show the virtue of rushing 
towards faith, migration in Allah’s path, assisting the religion and following the path of the pious predecessors. 

3. The knowledge of the Ghaib belongs exclusively to Allah. No one but Allah knows what is in people’s hearts. 4. There 
is hope for those believers who commit sin that Allah will turn to them and forgive them, if they repent and set right their 
actions. 5. Zakat is an obligation which carries a great reward and has an effect in causing wealth to grow, and purifying 
the soul from miserliness and other evil qualities. 6. Every person is accountable for his actions. Allah knows about what 
people do and will repay them for their actions on the Day of Judgement. 


Tawbah 


203 


Part 11 




















[LlL 





J^r 9 (j^j^>^L)J 4Ji\ 

3\±&. S\j^H \-3 ps3 c&^4j 

^ ^ -£ C. *£ ^ ^ 

I \ \ Aj\ a^s ^3^! (J^) O^Al£===d 

l)\ < 3 ^ ^<Jl 3 ^ o^ 

44^5j4£? 

^ ^^ 'Z't ^ ^z^ 

c£;^4^ ^^3y-4?rJ^ l^4j< 3^4-^p 
^jj\y^j<S^ jL^ii^. <S)j-l^ (j£) 


CO^cP) 





Ip There were also some hypocrites who built a 
mosque, not for Allah’s obedience, but to harm the 
Muslims, to support disbelief by strengthening the 
people of hypocrisy, to cause disunity amongst the 
believers and in preparation and anticipation for 
those who had waged war against Allah and His 
Messenger prior to the construction of the mosque. 

These hypocrites swear to you that they only want¬ 
ed goodness for the Muslims. Allah is witness that 
they are lying in this claim of theirs. 

HI Do not accept, O Prophet, the invitation of the 
hypocrites to you to pray in this mosque which 
was built for immoral purposes. Rather, the Quba’ 
mosque which was founded from its beginning on 
Mindfulness is more worthy of your praying in it 
than this mosque that was founded on disbelief. In 
the Quba’ mosque, there are men who love to purify 
themselves from ritual and physical impurities with 
water, as well as from sins with repentance and 
seeking forgiveness. Allah loves those who purify 
themselves from ritual and physical impurities and 
from sins. 

HI Can those who founded their building on rec¬ 
ognition of Allah (by following His instructions 
and avoiding His prohibitions) and Allah’s pleasure 
(by doing all forms of good) be equal to those who 
built a mosque to cause harm to the Muslims, to 
strengthen disbelief and to cause disunity amongst 
the believers? They can never be equal! The first 
have a strong structure with good foundation so it 
will not collapse; yet the second group are similar 
to a person who built a structure on the edge of a pit 
that is about to collapse and which collapses with 
him into the depths of Hell. Allah does not guide those who do wrong by committing disbelief, hypocrisy and other 
wrongs. 

HI The mosque that they built in order to cause harm will continue to be a source of doubt and hypocrisy in their hearts 
until their hearts are cut into pieces by their death or by their being killed by the sword. Allah knows the actions of His 
servants and He is Wise in the decision He passes with respect to repaying them for their good or evil. 

After Allah mentioned the shameful deeds of the hypocrites who stayed behind from striving in His path, He mentions 
the reward of those who strive in His path in the following verse. 

|j| Allah, may He be glorified, has purchased from the believers their lives - despite them belonging to Him - out of 
His grace for a high price: Paradise. They will fight the disbelievers so that Allah’s Word is highest and they will kill 
the disbelievers or be killed by them. Allah has made this true promise in the Torah (the scripture of Moses), the Gospel 
(the scripture of Jesus), and the Qur’an (the scripture of Muhammad (peace be upon him)). There is no one who is more 
faithful to his promise than Allah, so rejoice O believers, with the trade that you made with Allah, because of your gaining 
such a huge profit in it. That deal is the great success. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. What the hypocrites say should not be believed, because Allah has testified about their lies. 

2. Those who purify themselves from bodily and spiritual impurities are guaranteed the Love of Allah. 

3. The person who does an action to please Allah is not equal to the one who does an action in support of disbelief and to 
oppose the Muslims. The action of the first person will remain and become a source of happiness for the one who does 
it, whilst the action of the second person will disappear and become a cause of misfortune for the person who does it. 

4. The verses encourage striving in Allah’s path and explain that the reward for doing so is Paradise. 

5. The duty to strive in Allah’s path and encouraging others to do so was founded in the religions before Islam as well. 

6. Any situation that causes disunity amongst the believers is a sin which must be avoided and removed. On the other 
hand, any situation that creates unity amongst the believers must be followed and encouraged. 




















(fp The people who will receive this great reward 
are those who turn to Allah in repentance from 
idolatry, hypocrisy and sins; are sincere in their 
worship of Allah; praise their Lord in every con¬ 
dition; go out and strive in Allah’s path; fast; pray; 
instruct that which Allah and His Messenger have 
instructed and prohibit what Allah and His Messen¬ 
ger have prohibited; and guard Allah’s instructions 
by following them and His prohibitions by avoid¬ 
ing them. O Messenger, tell the believers who have 
these qualities the good news of what will make 
them happy in this world and the Afterlife. 

(JiJ It is not right for the Prophet and the believers to 
seek forgiveness from Allah for the idolaters, even 
if they are their relatives, after it has become clear 
to them that they are the people of the fire of Hell - 
because they died as idolaters. 

(jf| Abraham’s seeking forgiveness for his poly¬ 
theist father was only because of a promise he had 
made to him to do so, in the hope that he would 
submit. When it became clear to Abraham that his 
father was an enemy of Allah, due to the advice 
not being of benefit to him or due to his coming 
to know through revelation that he will die as a 
disbeliever, he renounced him. He had asked for¬ 
giveness for him on the basis of his own reason¬ 
ing and not in contradiction of any law that Allah 
had revealed to him. Abraham (peace be with him) 
used to frequently turn to Allah in humility and he 
used to overlook and pardon his people who were 
wrongdoers. 

@ Allah would never pass the judgement of mis¬ 
guidance against a people, after He had given them 
guidance, until He makes clear to them those forbidden things that they must avoid. If they do that which Allah had for¬ 
bidden after it has been declared forbidden and made clear to them, then He will judge them as misguided. Allah knows 
everything. Nothing is hidden from Him. He has taught you what you did not know. 

@ The control of the heavens and the control of the earth belongs to Allah. He has no partner in this, and nothing in 
them is hidden from Him. He gives life to whomever He wills and causes whomever He wills to die. You, O people, do 
not have, besides Allah, any friend to take care of your affairs nor any protector to guard you against evil and assist you 
against your enemy. 

Allah has forgiven the Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him) since he gave permission to the hypocrites to stay 
behind from the battle of Tabuk. He has also forgiven the Emigrants and the Helpers who did not stay behind, but fol¬ 
lowed him in the battle of Tabuk despite the intense heat, the lack of means and the powerful strength of the enemy. This 
was after a group of them who intended to abandon the expedition, almost deviated from the truth and the path of correct 
guidance, because of the great difficulty they faced. Then Allah enabled them to be patient and to go out for that battle. 
He forgave them, for He, may He be glorified, is Kind and Merciful towards them. It was because of His mercy that He 
enabled them to repent to Him and that He accepted their repentance. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The verses explain the qualities that believers should have, so that they become worthy of receiving good news that 
will make them happy. 

2. It is forbidden to ask forgiveness for a person who passed away as an idolater. 

3. It is not valid to use the action of Abraham (peace be with him) initially asking for forgiveness of his father as proof 
for the permissibility of asking forgiveness for idolaters. 

4. Sins and evil actions are the cause of disasters, disappointment and failure. 

5. Allah is the Owner of everything. He is our friend and protector; we have no friend or protector besides Him. 

6. The verses show the virtue of the Companions of the Prophet (peace be upon him) over all other people. 

7. Allah sends His mercy on the people of faith by protecting them from misguidance and giving them guidance. 


jLs* V^=s=» 

d j Cri ASA ojl Uj 





















Y*ni 







l&ytij'*$ 0 ^ oz 

(Sg|> Oj^Tjidjit tjn^ 1 <4 

\^C^^Xe-C j*^L>J L^Slj?^)l a ^==jt Jiw*?. 

j O^aiAj sJv-^= s Jj S/V*^> '^y L ^i.'^J ($) 


|p Allah turned in forgiveness to the three - 
Murarah ibn Al-Rabl‘, Ka‘b ibn Malik and Hilal 
ibn Umayyah - who stayed behind from going 
with the Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him)to 
Tabuk. The Prophet (peace be upon him)instructed 
people to stay away from them, which made them 
feel sadness and grief. The earth seemed narrow to 
them despite its vastness, and their hearts felt con¬ 
stricted because of their loneliness, and they were 
certain there was no place of refuge or help they 
could go to except to Allah alone. Allah was Mer¬ 
ciful to them, enabling them to turn to Him, asking 
for forgiveness, and accepting their repentance. 

Allah is the One who accepts the repentance from 
His slaves, and is full of mercy and compassion to 
them. 

(j!| O you who believe and follow the Messenger, 
act according to His sacred law, and be mindful of 
Him, following what He instructs and staying away 
from what He has prohibited; and be with those 
who are true in their faith and in what they say and 
do, as there is no salvation except in truth. 

HI It is not for the people of Medina, or those 
around them of the people who live in the desert, to 
stay behind the Messenger of Allah (peace be upon 
him)if he himself goes out to fight, or to be stingy 
with themselves and give preference to their own 
safety over the safety of the Messenger (peace and 
blessings be upon him). Rather, they should sacri¬ 
fice themselves for him. This is because they suffer 
no thirst, tiredness or hunger for the sake of Allah, 
and do not step anywhere in the land of those who 
deny the truth with their own feet or the hooves of 
their horses or camels, angering thereby those who oppose the truth, and do not make a gain over their enemy, killing or 
capturing them, making war gains or defeating them, except that Allah records for them the reward of a good action for 
them, which He accepts from them. Allah does not allow the reward of those who do good to be lost. Rather, He gives it 
to them in full, and increases the reward for them. 

(JfJ These successful ones do not sacrifice any wealth, whether it is small or great, and do not cross any valley except that 
their sacrifice or journey is recorded so that Allah may repay them, giving them in the Afterlife the reward for the best 
of what they used to do. 

@ The believers should not go out all together to fight, so that they are not wiped out if their enemy overcomes them, 
and they should not all stay behind. A group should go out to strive for Allah’s sake, and a group should remain behind to 
accompany the messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, and to gain understanding of the religion through 
the Qur’an and sacred laws they hear from him, peace and blessings be upon him, to advise their people when they return 
to them of what they have learned, so that they are aware of Allah’s punishment and His consequences and they follow 
what He instructs and stay away from what He has not allowed. This was concerning the companies that the messenger 
of Allah, peace be upon him, would send to different areas, choosing a group from among his companions. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The obligation of being mindful of Allah and sticking with those who are truthful. 

2. It is obligatory for a Muslim to prefer Allah and His Messenger over everything else. 

3. Spending for the sake of Allah is a great virtue. 

4. Gaining understanding of the sacred path of life is as important as striving for the sake of Allah. 

5. People of knowledge and people who strive for the sake of Allah are the supports of Islam. 


<j|! 




















5^tga\S1v^5aj^^i 

Ajib^s^ ^B~iB.jBrB? " a J_y^ (24>j^\iij(«j) 
ft \3>\Sl^lftj\ & So Ai& 

\3>1j {2j£k 

'U®^u£&e*. -JLJb^j\^ jn 

OHVJ' J^== J >-£->' — 


O you who believe, fight against those who 
oppose the truth who are near to you, because of 
the danger they pose to you because of their prox¬ 
imity; and show strength in order to inspire fear in 
them and drive away their evil. Allah is with the Al¬ 
lah-conscious believers with His help and support. 
@ When Allah revealed a surah to the Messenger 
(peace and blessings be upon him), some of the 
hypocrites would ask by way of mocking and ridi¬ 
cule; ‘Which one of you believers has had his faith 
increase?’ As for those who had faith in Allah, and 
followed His Messenger, the revelation of the surah 
had indeed increased them in faith, and they were 
happy because of the benefit it contained for them 
in this world and for the Afterlife. 

(jlj As for the hypocrites, the revelation of the 
Qur’an with its laws and stories increases them in 
sickness and wickedness because of their rejection 
of what is revealed, so that these deplorable char¬ 
acteristics become fixed in them; and the disease 
of their hearts increase with the revelation of the 
Qur’an, because whenever something is revealed 
they are sceptical about it. 

(JIJ Are the hypocrites not taught a lesson by being 
tried by Allah, when He exposes their hypocrisy, 
once or twice a year? Then, despite knowing that 
Allah did this to them, they do not turn to Him from 
their disbelief, asking for forgiveness, and do not 
root out their hypocrisy, or think about what hap¬ 
pens to them and that it is from Allah. 

@ Whenever Allah reveals a surah to the Messen¬ 
ger (peace be upon him), mentioning the states of 
the hypocrites, the hypocrites would look at one an¬ 
other, saying ‘Does anyone see you?’ If no one is looking at them, they leave the gathering. Allah turned their hearts away 
from guidance and goodness, and leaves them, because they are a people who do not understand. 

(S§| There has come to you O Arabs, a messenger from among your own selves and from your lineage, who is an Arab like 
you. What is difficult for you is difficult for him. He is concerned about you, calling you to have faith in your Lord, and 
he is kind and compassionate with the believers. 

If they reject you O Messenger, not believing in what you come with, then say: ‘Allah is sufficient for me, there is 
nothing worthy of worship except Him. I rely on Him alone, and He, Glory be to Him, is the Lord of the Great Throne.’ 

Beneficial Points: 

1. It is necessary to fight against those who oppose the truth, who are nearest in proximity to the Muslims, if Islam has 
spread and there is a need for such fighting. 

2. The state of the hypocrites when the Qur’an was revealed was one of unhappiness and anxiousness. 

3. The Prophet (peace be upon him)was merciful with and concerned about the believers. 

4. The verses indicate that faith increases and decreases, and that the believer should keep an eye on his faith and commit 
to it, so that it is renewed and grows, and is always increasing. 


\j> \ i ij 0 bb/b^b p-t&sij BjyjBti ’ 





























1 J4J>3j4 


[XlAj 



Jonah (Surah Yunus) 

® Themes of the Surah: 

Countering those who reject the revelation with 
clear proofs and evidences, and calling to faith by 
means of persuasion and warning. 

^Explanation: 

(Jp) Alif Lam Ra’ - the placement of such letters has 
been discussed at the beginning of Surah Al-Baqa- 
rah. 

jj} Are the people amazed that Allah has sent rev¬ 
elation to a man like themselves, instructing him 
to warn them about the punishment of Allah, and 
telling those who have faith in Allah the good news 
that they will have a high rank with their Lord, glo¬ 
ry be to Him, as a reward for the good actions they 
did? The disbelievers said that this man who came 
with these verses was clearly a magician. 

(Jp Truly, your Lord is Allah, Who created the 
heavens in their greatness and the earth in its vast¬ 
ness in six days, and then established Himself on 
the Throne. Why do they wonder that a man from 
amongst them should be sent to them? Allah alone 
determines whatever He wills and no one can plead 
with Him on behalf of anyone unless Allah gives 
permission and is pleased with the one who pleads. 

That is Allah, your Lord, so devote your worship to 
Him alone being sincere to Him. Will you not then 
consider all of these proofs evidences that there is 
no Allah but He. Whoever heeds this reminder will 
know it to be true, and believe in Him. 

@ You will return to Him alone on the Day of 
Judgement, when He will repay you for what you 
have done. Allah’s promise to humankind about this is a true. He is well capable of that. He made people from clay with¬ 
out precedent. He will bring them back again after their death to reward with justice those who had faith in Allah and did 
good actions, neither subtracting from their good actions nor increasing their bad actions. As for those who disbelieved in 
Allah and His Messenger, they will have a drink of boiling water which will affect their insides and for them is a painful 
punishment because of their disbelief in Allah and His Messenger. 

@ It is He Who made the sun radiate light and made the moon a light illuminated by it, determining its progression 
through twenty-eight phases - a phase being the change it goes through every twenty-four hours - so that people would 
know the number of days by the sun and the number of months and years by the moon. Allah did not create the heavens 
and the earth and what is in them except with the truth, revealing His power and might to people. Allah makes clear these 
obvious signs and evidence that there is no Allah but Him for a people who know how to draw conclusions from such 
facts. 

@ In the succession of the night and day, and the darkness and light that accompany this, and the shortness of one and 
length of the other, and in the created things in the heavens and the earth, are signs showing the power of Allah for a 
people who are Mindful, following what He instructs and staying away from what He has prohibited. 

Beneficial Points: 

l.A confirmation of the prophethood of Muhammad (peace and blessing be upon him) and the fact that his sending was 
something logical, and not a cause for astonishment. 2. The task of the Messenger was to give the good news of Paradise 
to the believers, and to warn the wrongdoers about the fire of Hell. 3. A confirmation of Allah’s Lordship and Divinity. 

4. Confirmation of the greatness of the Throne, and that Allah established Himself upon it in a way befitting His Glory 
and Majesty. 5. Those who act as intercessors on the Day of Judgement will only be able to intercede if Allah gives 
permission to them and was pleased with them in the worldly life. 6. There is a confirmation of the Day of Judgement 
and the rewards and punishments of it. 7. It is proven that Allah has made the movement of the sun and the phases of the 
moon to help determine the date, by days months and years. 


oL-U^ ^-44 <4 o\0 ^3^. 

0 ^ 


Yunus 


208 

















Oi^\j l^ j 


0 y O jj,&^ '*' 

Ul^g> 3 \+**\ g- ^ y jo \ o!(^)l) 



i\c^rdS^ ] 
S^*3 ^4^>4r^?J >4^ 


j 4 LJ ^ 


\4l>^ 


^ ^ ^) 0j^*%j 

3£ c3J ofe^4%i£ i 


@> The disbelievers who do not prepare themselves 
for their meeting with Allah, not fearing it or desir¬ 
ing it, who are satisfied with the life of the world, 
which is passing, instead of the eternal life of the 
Afterlife, feeling themselves at home in this world 
and content with it, and who do not consider Al¬ 
lah’s signs - 

{JfjS) Their dwelling place on the Day of Judgement 
will be the fire of Hell, because of what they earned 
through their disbelief and rejection. 

@ Those who have faith in Allah and do good ac¬ 
tions, Allah will guide them because of their faith 
to doing more good actions that lead to His Pleas¬ 
ure. Then on the Day of Judgement, Allah will enter 
them into gardens of eternal bliss with rivers flow¬ 
ing beneath them. 

@) Their prayer in Paradise will be the glorifying of 
Allah; and the greeting of Allah to them and the an¬ 
gels and their greeting to each other will be 'Peace’ 
and the end of their prayer will be praising Allah, 
the Lord of all creation. 

@ If Allah responded quickly to people who 
pray for evil upon themselves, their children, or 
their wealth when they are angry, in the way He 
responds to them when they pray for good, they 
would have been destroyed. But Allah gives them 
time. He abandons those who do not expect to meet 
Him, because they do not fear the consequences of 
their actions, or hope for a reward, leaving them 
wavering and uncertain, sceptical about the Day of 
Judgement. 

@ When those who transgress suffer from an 
illness or misfortune, they call on Allah, humbling 
themselves and invoking Him, lying on their sides, or sitting or standing, wanting Him to remove the misfortune from 
them; but when Allah answers their prayers, removing their suffering, they continue doing what they had been doing 
before, as if they had never called on Allah to remove their misfortune. Just as continuing in their error is made to look 
attractive to them, the disbelief and disobedience of the person who oversteps the limits is made to look attractive to them, 
so they do not give it up. 

@ And indeed I destroyed communities before you, because they rejected the messengers of Allah and fell to sin. Though 
their messengers came to them with clear proofs showing the truth of what they brought from their Lord, they were not 
keen to believe and so Allah abandoned them. Just as Allah repaid those previous, disobedient communities, He repays 
those who are like them in every time and place. 

@ Then He made you successors to these communities who rejected the truth and who were destroyed, to see what you 
would do, and whether you would do good, for which you would be rewarded; or do evil, which you would have to face 
the consequences of. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The repayment for the disbelievers on the Day of Judgement is the fire of Hell, because of what they earned through 
their disbelief and rejection. 

2. The reward of those who have faith is Paradise, because of the good that they did. 

3. Allah is merciful with humankind by not answering their prayers when they ask for harmful things for themselves or 
their children when they are angry and not thinking clearly. 

4. People often pray to Allah during times of difficulty, but turn away from Him during good times. Therefore, we should 
be careful not to be like this. 

5. Previous communities were destroyed because of their overstepping the limits through disobedience. 




Yunus 


209 


Part 11 


















^^JssCta^JS ^Xj>^j\ \ JJJb^\i>(j\ftJ_a> \je-LjaJ. 

^l-jJ^>X^l^ &£$^<s)-&ic£■$&$ o' d. 

JS —ij olJ^aPO^^-' oi 

&LL*J 


1 


I 


24S^j^j \ \j-X£=s 4j^\ Cy*~^ 

JJ* \ * & Li 

^^5 (^jlJLjo^ I^j o^jo\ Js 4j^\ 


JC-P 


@ If the clear ayahs of the Qur’an are recited to 
them proving the Oneness of Allah, those who deny 
the resurrection and who do not expect a reward or 
fear any consequences tell Muhammad to bring a 
different Qur’an other than this Qur’an which at¬ 
tacks the worship of idols, or to change it, substitut¬ 
ing some or all of it for what agrees with their de¬ 
sires. Allah told Muhammad to say to them that it is 
not up to him to change anything himself, and what 
is more, he would not be able to come with some¬ 
thing else. Rather, it is Allah alone Who changes 
what He wills of it, and the Messenger only follows 
what Allah reveals to him, fearing that if he went 
against Allah, by doing as they asked him to, he 
would be punished for it on a mighty day, the Day 
of Judgement. 

@ Say to them O Messenger (peace and blessings 
be upon him): If Allah had willed I would not have 
recited the Qur’an to you, and it would not have 
been conveyed to you. And if Allah had willed, you 
would not have come to know this Qur’an from my 

mouth. For I have lived among you for a long time- ^ ^ T ^. ^ ^ • I 

for forty years, not reading or writing, nor did I seek jjjl L$ | 

this type of knowledge or search for it. Can you not 
reason and realise that what I have brought you is 
from Allah, and not invented by myself? 

(jp There is no greater wrongdoer then he who 
makes up a lie about Allah, so how could I make 
a change in this Qur’an, inventing a lie about it as 

you want me to? Those who overstep the limits of < \ ^ ^ ^ jl, 

Allah by inventing lies about Him will not succeed. 

@ The idolaters worship what they claim to be 
Allahs beside Allah, which cannot benefit or harm 
them, while Allah can benefit and harm as He wills; and they say that the things they worship will plead with Allah on 
their behalf, so that they will not be punished for their sins. Ask them O Messenger, ‘Would you inform Allah, the Know¬ 
ing, that He has a partner, when He does not know of a partner for Himself in the heavens or the earth?!’Allah is divine 
and far above the falsehood and lies of the idolaters. 

(jp People were just one believing, unified nation, then they differed: some of them still had faith, while others disbe¬ 
lieved. If it had not been for the decree of Allah that He would not judge between them in what they differed about, then 
it would have been made clear which of them were guided and which of them were astray. 

(jp The idolaters ask why a sign is not sent to Muhammad from his Lord to prove the truth of what he says. Say to them O 
Messenger, ‘The sending down of signs is Allah’s knowledge alone, so wait for the sign you ask for, as I am also waiting 
along with you for it.’ 

^ Beneficial Points: 

1. The Qur’an is the Word of Allah, and no one can change or distort it, because it is safeguarded. 

2. The magnitude of making up lies about Allah or distorting His words, as the Jews did with the Torah, is clearly demon¬ 
strated. 

3. Only Allah alone can benefit or harm people. 

4. The falsehood of the idolaters saying that their Allahs would plead on their behalf with Allah is established. 

5. Following desires and going against the sacred path of life are the reasons for people differing with one another. 


^3 \ o 2 jai Si j j Ol^==> j 

JjLJj of S'* <4^ j 





















J~& ]j&J o ^3> jJ==>5 ky^ ||» 

§m 

J| J&i 1 ^-^ ^ <4 ^ ^ U4^-' l^^iS^-^^Si 


05 ^ 1 ^ 



If Allah makes the idolaters experience some 
mercy, such as rain and abundance after drought 
and suffering, they start to plot and scheme in re¬ 
jection of Allah’s signs. Say O Messenger to these 
idolaters, that Allah is quicker at plotting and in en¬ 
ticing and luring them, and quicker in dealing His 
Punishment. The angels record what they plan in 
the way of scheming, and nothing escapes them, so 
how could it escape their Creator? Allah will repay 
them for their scheming. 

@ It is Allah Who makes people travel on the land, 
on foot or riding, and it is He Who makes them 
travel in ships on the sea. They sail in them with 
a good wind, which the people in them are glad 
about. Then a gale wind comes to them, and the 
waves of the sea come to them from every side, 
until when they are certain they will be destroyed 
they start to call upon Allah alone, not associating 
anything with Him, saying: ‘If You save us from 
this deadly situation we will be truly thankful for 
what You have blessed us with.’ 

@ But when He answers their prayer, and saves 
them from their distress, they cause corruption in 
the earth, disbelieving and committing wrongdoing 
and sins. Wake up and realise O People! The evil 
consequences of your sins and transgression only 
falls upon yourselves and does not hurt Allah in any 
way. They enjoy it in the life of this world which is 
passing, and then they return to Allah on the day of 
Judgement, and He will inform them of the wrong¬ 
doing they used to do, and repay them for it. 

@ The example of the life of this world, and the en¬ 
joyment in it, and how quickly it comes to an end, is 
that of the rain which is absorbed by the plants of the earth, from which people eat grains and fruits, and animals benefit 
from its vegetation. When the earth has taken on its bright colour and looks beautiful because of the different plants 
growing on it, and the people think that they will be able to harvest and gather what has grown, Allah’s command comes 
to destroy it, so as if it had been harvested and not been full of anything. This is how Allah makes clear the true reality of 
the wroldly life and how He expounds upon His verses and signs so you may think about them and take a powerful lesson. 
@ And Allah calls all people to His Paradise which is the Home of Peace, where people will be safe from difficulties and 
worries, and safe from death; and Allah enables whom He wills of His servants to come to Islam, guiding and leading 
them to this Home of Peace. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Allah is quicker at scheming against those who scheme against His believing servants. 

2. An evidence of the weak and shameful state of most people, because of their sincerely praying to Allah alone in diffi¬ 
culty, yet forgetting Him in ease. 

3. People’s overstepping of Allah’s limits returns upon themselves, and does not harm anyone except themselves. 

4. The reality of this world is made clear, in how quickly it will come to an end and disappear, and that there is no hap¬ 
piness in it that is not short-lived. 

5. People should not be deceived by this world, and what they do should be for the Afterlife. 

6. Paradise will be the home of the believer, with its bliss and safety from hardship and worry. 




{^) 




















(J^ l^^tat^sZ44?y 4j^ 

j ^iifji505j j^\^i^i\ 4^1 aij 


yvyp 1 


4^1 


@ Those who do good, including that which Allah 
made obligatory on them, and stay away from the 

sins that Allah has prohibited, will receive the best J5§ ~ v 9j XS \ ^ ^uU * |4*M 

reward, which is Paradise, and even more, which is 
to see the noble face of Allah. Neither dust, nor hu¬ 
miliation nor disgrace will cover their faces. Such 
people who do good are the companions of Para¬ 
dise, where they will remain eternally. 

@ Those who do bad actions - disbelieving and 
doing wrong - will receive equal repayment in the 
Afterlife for the sins they committed in this life. 

Their faces will be covered in humiliation and dis¬ 
grace, and there will be no one to save them from 
the punishment that Allah will give them. It will be 
as if their faces were covered by patches of black¬ 
ness of the dark night because of the great amount 
of smoke and blackness that will reach them from 
the fire of Hell. Such people are the companions of 
the fire of Hell, where they will live eternally. 

@ And remember O Messenger, the Day of Judge¬ 
ment, when Allah will gather together all of cre¬ 
ation, and will tell those who associated partners 
with Allah in the world to stay in their place - they 
and the ‘Allahs’ they used to worship beside Allah. 

Then He will separate those who were worshipped 
from those who worshipped them; and those who 
were worshipped will free themselves from those 
who worshipped them, saying, ‘It was not us you 
worshipped’. 

@ Their so called Allahs dissasociate themselves 
from them, saying that Allah is sufficient as a wit¬ 
ness that they were not happy being worshipped 
by them, nor did they command them to do so, nor 
were they aware of their worship of them! 

(Sj| In that great place each soul will be informed of what it did in the life of the world. Then the idolaters will return to 
their true Lord, Who is Allah, Who has power over their reckoning, and the intercession of idols that they made up will 
be non-existent. 

@ Say O Messenger to these idolators, ‘Who is it that provides for you from the sky, sending down rain; who provides for 
you from the earth, with the plants that grow in it and what it contains of metals and minerals; and who brings the living 
from the dead, like humanity from a drop of semen and the bird from the egg; and who brings the dead from the living, 
like semen from animals, and the egg from the bird? And who governs everything in the heavens and the earth and what 
has been created in them? They will reply that Allah is the One Who does all of this. Say to them that, if they know this, 
they should be mindful of Him, following what Allah instructs and staying away from what He has prohibited. 

@ The One who does all of that O people is Allah, The Truth, your Creator and the Manager of your affairs. Then besides 
truth, what is there except error and loss? How do you turn away from the clear truth, with its proofs, to falsehood whims 
and desires? 

(S|p Just as the Lordship of Allah is established. His Decree has also been established; that those who turn away from the 
truth out of pride will not have faith. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Performing many good actions is highly encouraged because this will result in happiness and in seeing the noble Face 
of Allah in Paradise. 2. Doing bad actions is clearly warned against because this will result in suffering, disgrace and 
humiliation. 3. The disowning by every ‘Allah,’ whatever it may be, of whoever worshipped it on the day of Judgement. 
4. On the day of Judgement every soul will be informed of the good and evil it did. 5. Showing the power of Allah, and 
that He has power over all things. 6. Believing in Allah’s lordship alone and yet associating others with Him in divinity 
and worship is futile and will not benefit the worshipper on the Day of Judgement, as it is necessary to believe in His 
lordship and His divinity without associating anything with Him. 7. If Allah decrees that a people will not be guided to 
faith, then they will not believe. 


cP 1 3 0 

^3-5 33^=4 -'^ 0 Jis 5 


Yunus 


212 



















Say to them O Messenger: ‘Is there are any of 
their ‘partners’ who they worship beside Allah, who 
originate creation from nothing, and bring it back 
to life after death?’ Tell them: ‘Allah originates cre¬ 
ation from nothing, and then brings it back to life 
after death, so how can you O idolaters turn away 
from the truth to falsehood?’ 

Say to them O messenger: ‘Is there are any of 
their ‘partners’ who they worship beside Allah, one 
who guides to the truth? Is He Who guides people 
to the truth and calls them to it more worthy of be¬ 
ing followed, or your so-called Allahs which cannot 
guide themselves unless they are guided? What is 
wrong with you that you judge so falsely, claiming 
that they are ‘partners’ to Allah? Allah is far above 
what you say.’ 

@ Most of the idolaters only follow matters that 
they have no knowledge about, only guessing and 
assuming. Mere assumption cannot take the place 
of knowledge and can be of no use against it. Al¬ 
lah knows all that they do, nothing of what they 
do is hidden from Him, and they will be rewarded 
accordingly. 

@ This Qur’an, miraculous in its eloquence and 
law-giving, could not be fabricated, and it cannot 
be attributed to anyone but Allah, because people 
are not capable of coming up with anything simi¬ 
lar to it. Rather, it confirms the scriptures that were 
revealed before it, and clarifies the laws in it, and 
there is no doubt that it was revealed by the Lord of 
all created things. 

Or do these idolaters say that Muhammad 
(peace and blessings be upon him) came up with 
the Qur’an himself claiming that it is from Allah? Say to them O Messenger, ‘If I as a human being like you, have been 
able to come up with it, then you also should bring a chapter like it, and call upon whomever you wish to assist you, if you 
are telling the truth in claiming that the Qur’an is not really from Allah. But you have not be able to do so, even though 
you are talented and eloquent in the language - showing you that the Qur’an has been revealed by Allah.’ 

@ Yet the disbelievers do not respond to these challenges, but reject the Qur’an before even thinking about it, without 
understanding it, and the punishment about which they have been warned has not yet come to them, although it is near!. 
In the same way, past communities rejected the truth, and Allah sent His punishment upon them. So reflect upon the end 
of these communities who rejected the truth, because they were destroyed by Allah. 

^ There are idolaters who believe in the Qur’an before their death, and there are those who do not believe in it out of 
stubbornness and pride until they die. Allah knows best those who persist in their disbelief and ingratitude, and will repay 
them for their actions. 

(S§p) If they reject you O Messenger, then you will be rewarded for what you do, and your actions are your responsibility; 
and that they will be repaid for what they do, and they will have to deal with the consequences of their actions. They will 
not be responsible for what happens to you, and you are free from what happens to them. 

@ And some of the idolaters listen to you O Messenger as you recite the Qur’an not wanting to accept it and follow 
it. Are you able to make deaf people hear? Likewise you cannot guide those who are deaf to the truth, as they will not 
understand it. 

Beneficial Points: 

1. The verses confirm the belief that humankind will be brought back to life after death. 

2. It is Allah alone, the Guider to the truth, and no one else, Who gives guidance. 

3. The necessity of following articles of faith with certainty and without conjecture. 

4. The miraculous nature of the Qur’an in its eloquence and law-giving is a proof that the Qur’an is from Allah. 

5. No one until the Day of Judgement will be able to produce even an verse like the noble Qur’an. 

6. The verses make clear the pride and stubbornness of the idolaters in their rejection of the Prophet (peace be upon him). 


j o ^ 

Jp^ ciiScii 

J \yd d f' 0 Oydd 4 jj ot 





















jM S^Jjt^ ^\jx^^Sl0 

\y l^taj 4j^i\ jS^J^ 0^jU3r 


>4*?l 


@ And from them are those who see you O Mes¬ 
senger with their normal eyesight, but not with the 
vision of insight. Is it possible for you to make the 
blind see? You are not able to do so, and likewise 
you is unable to guide those who lack perception 
and understanding. 

@ Without doubt, Allah is far too High and Exalt¬ 
ed that He would wrong people, and He does not 
wrong them by even the weight of an atom. Rather, 
it is they who wrong themselves, bringing about 
their own ruin because of clinging to falsehood, 
pride and stubbornness. 

@ On the day that Allah gathers people on the Day 
of Judgement, to bring them to account, it will be 
as if they had lived on earth and then waited after 
death for the Day of Judgement for only an hour, 
and no more. They will recognise each other on 
that day, but then their acquaintances will be cut 
off from them because of the intensity of the terrors 
they witness on the Day of Judgement. The losers 
will be those who rejected the meeting with their 
Lord on the Day of Judgement and who did not be¬ 
lieve in the day or resurrection so that they could 
safeguard themselves from loss. 

@ Regardless of whether Allah shows the Messen¬ 
ger (peace be upon himjsome of the punishment He 
promises them before his death, or He makes him 
die before this, they will return to Allah on the Day 
of Judgement. Moreover, Allah is a witness to what 
they used to do, none of it being hidden from Him, 
and they will be repaid for their actions. 

@> Every past nation had a messenger sent to them. 

When the messenger delivered to them what he was 
instructed to, and they rejected him, it was judged justly between him and them. Allah saved the messenger out of His 
grace, and destroyed them through His justice; and they were not wronged in any way in the repayment for what they did. 
y§5 The stbbom disbelievers say: ‘When will the punishment you promised to us occur, if you are telling the truth.’ 

(Sj) Say to them O Messenger, ‘I have no control over anything benefiting or harming me, so how can I control benefit or 
harm for other people, apart from what Allah wills? How then do I know the Ghaib? Allah has appointed a set time for 
the destruction of every nation; but only Allah knows the times. If the time of your destruction has arrived, it cannot be 
brought forward or delayed by even a second.’ 

Say O Messenger to these people who wish to hasten on the punishment: ‘Inform me if the punishment of Allah came 
toy ou at any time of the night or day, what is it of this punishment exactly that you want to be brought quickly- happiness 
and joy? Or would it be sorrow and regret? Therefore, you should not seek to hasten it.’ 

@ Or is it that they will believe after the promised punishment has come down upon them, when believing will not bene¬ 
fit anyone who had not previously brought faith? Is it now that they will believe? And before they were seeking to hasten 
it because they did not believe in it?!@ Then when they have been made to enter the punishment and they will seek to be 
removed from it, it will be said to them: ‘Taste the everlasting torment of the Hereafter. Are you not being repaid except 
for your disbelief and disobedience?^) The idolaters ask you O Messenger if this punishment which they have been 
promised is true? Tell them: ‘By Allah! It is the very truth and you cannot get away from it.’ 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. People bring ruin upon themselves: Allah is High and Exalted, that He would wrong anyone. 2. The believers must 
prepare themselves for the Day of Judgement and the terrors and events of it. 3. Those who deny the Day of Judgement 
and their meeting with Allah have lost everything. 4. The task of the Messenger is to deliver his message, and Allah will 
judge between him and his people, if they reject him, on the day of Judgement. 5. Benefit and harm is in Allah’s hands, 
glory be to Him, and no one in creation has control over harm or benefit for himself or anyone else. 6. Every nation has 
a set time for their length which only Allah has knowledge of. This time cannot be brought forward or delayed for even a 
second. 7. Believing at the point of death and the soul leaving the body will not be of any benefit. 

















| cpjiSlr' 


|Y\o 





rr f b£. 'fr / . .^, - 

r y..T.flH i <—>\-dii\VjVjai <L»\joM 

I ^ j y s- ^ s' } ^ 't x X- )} s’ * ^ anu uic_y win nui uc wr 

6^ repaid for their actions. 

■ ^ /(55 1\ Tlia ^rvntrrvl rvf \i;lio 

I —^3 ^ V^S IS (^) 

I jX^\ Jj3j> gi 

^ 4^AJ 4J^ J^bjs {^) 

lJJLJ ^ JS(^) ^ 

| (j£p^Z^===d >^ji\ 

>J$S\ aS±\^JIjjJa Jd.<V^\ g^Uj< ffi >(L)_j_AA) 

j >&US 

g^gs g5 lij gli (jg^^l^^gj^Cig'y 

g^sJp 

l| Sjj gfj^ ^_j ju i J.^g£ g^4£*i^5 

j 0 k*£^j cSttji g-^L^ ~Sjj 


@ If every person who associated partners with Al¬ 
lah possessed all the valuable wealth on earth, they 
would offer it as ransom from Allah’s punishment 
if they were given the opportunity to do so. The 
idolaters will conceal their regret for their disbelief 
when they see the punishment on the Day of Judge¬ 
ment. Allah will decide between them with justice 
and they will not be wronged, and they will only be 



_ The control of whatever is in the heavens and 
earth is only Allah’s. Allah’s promise of punish¬ 
ment for the disbelievers will undoubtedly occur, 
but most of them do not know that and are therefore 
in doubt. 

@ He, may He be glorified, raises the dead and 
causes the living to die. It is to Him alone that you 
will be returned on the Day of Judgement. He will 
then repay you for your actions. 

O people, now this Qur’an has come to you, a 
powerful reminder, encouragement and warning. It 
is a cure for the illnesses of doubt and uncertainty 
that are in the hearts. It contains guidance to the 
path of truth and is a mercy for the believers, who 
are the ones who benefit from it. 

@ Say, O Messenger, to the people: The Qur’an 
that Muhammad (peace be upon him) brought to 
you is Allah’s grace and mercy to you. So rejoice 
in Allah’s grace and mercy to you by way of the 
revelation of this Qur’an, and not in anything be¬ 
sides this. 

What Muhammad (peace be upon him)brought to 
them from His Lord is better than the temporary 
and trivial things of this world. 

@ Say, O Messenger, to these idolaters: Tell me about Allah’s favour to you by way of the provision that He sent down, 
which you treated as you wished by making some unlawful and some lawful. Also, say to them: Did Allah give you per¬ 
mission in declaring those things lawful or unlawful, or are you making up lies about Allah? 

@ What do those who invent lies about Allah think will happen to them on the Day of Judgement? Do they think they 
will be forgiven? Never! Allah is Bountiful to people by giving them respite and not punishing them immediately; but 
most people deny Allah’s favours to them and are not grateful for them. 

(jJS) You, O Messenger, do not get involved in any matter, nor do you recite any portion of the Qur’an, nor do you, O 
believers, do any action, except that I see you. I know about you when you act, and I hear you. The weight of an atom, in 
the sky or on earth, is not hidden from the knowledge of your Lord. Nor is there anything lesser or more in weight, except 
that it is recorded in a clear book that does not omit anything, no matter how small or big it may be. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The verses show the seriousness of the punishment that awaits those who associate partners with Allah, to the extent 
that they will wish to protect themselves from it with everything that is on earth; but even that will not be accepted from 
them. 

2. Allah’s punishment will most certainly fall on the disbelievers. 

3. The Qur’an is a cure for the believers from the illnesses of the heart, because of the guidance and advice it contains. 

4. A believer should rejoice in the blessing of Islam and faith and not in the trivial things of this world. 

5. The legislation of what is lawful and unlawful is only from Allah. 

6. We should be aware of Allah’s watching over us in secret and in public. Allah is aware of all our actions. 

7. Everything a person does is recorded by Allah in a book that does not leave out anything, no matter how small or big 
it may be. 


Yunus 

























Y > *1, ^ ^ 

JL^&tJiijP^J 4&\ frLlqf 


0 


^4^=4 ju$*y *jj>$\^&&^\ g&z$ j 



tv,> 


i4A>\ 


djA q^Xaj J0j$ L_3<A? o^Jli\._ 5dP 


>1 


h’.oU' 


=/-^ 0_J-> 

^jj >-^=d 0 5k? 

1 !^TjU5o^bu/ip^4: 


4 A. 


@ The friends of Allah will not have any fear of 
the terrors to come on the Day of Rising and they 
will not grieve over the pleasures of the world that 
they missed. 

@ The friends of Allah are those who possess the 
qualities of having faith in Allah and following His 
Messenger; they are mindful of Allah by fulfilling 
His instructions and avoiding His prohibitions. 

@ There is good news for these friends of Allah 
from their Lord, which will make them happy in 
the life of this world by means of good dreams and 
praise from people. They will also receive good 
news from the angels when they take away their 
souls. Allah’s promise will never be broken. That 
reward is the great success because it entails the 
fulfilment of their desires and salvation from what 
they fear. 

@ Do not grieve, O Messenger, over what these 
people say in an attempt to insult or attack your re¬ 
ligion. All power and dominion belongs to Allah. 

Nothing is outside His ability. He is the One Who 
hears their statements and knows their actions, and 
He will repay them for that. 

{§} The control of whoever is in the heavens and 
earth is only Allah’s. What is it that the idolaters 
who worship partners besides Allah are following? 

In reality, they are only following doubt and they 
are only lying when they attribute partners to Allah. 

Allah is far above their statements. 

@ It is He alone Who has made the night for you, 

O people, to take rest from tiredness. He has made 
the day bright for you to work and earn your live¬ 
lihood. In that there are clear evidence for a people 
who listen with a view to being mindful and accepting. 

(j|j) Some of the idolaters said, ‘Allah has taken the angels as daughters’. Allah is free of their statement. He, may He be 
glorified, is Self-sufficient and is not in need of any of His creation. The control of whatever is in the heavens and the 
earth is His. You, O idolaters, do not have any proof for this statement of yours. Are you saying such a serious statement 
about Allah - by attributing a child to Him - even though you do not know the reality of this and you have no proof? 
@ Say to them, O Messenger: Those who invent lies about Allah - by attributing a child to Him - will not achieve what 
they desire and will not be saved from what they fear. 

@ They should not be deceived by the luxuries of the world they enjoy. This is a brief and temporary enjoyment and 
then they will return to Me on the Day of Judgement. I will then make them taste the fierce punishment because of their 
disbelief in Me and rejection of My Messenger. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The friends of Allah are the ones who will be safe on the Day of Judgement and they will not grieve over what they 
missed. 

2. Allah’s friendship is for those who have faith in Him, fulfil His instructions, avoid His prohibitions and follow His 
Messenger (peace be upon him). 

3. The believers will receive good news from their Lord: either by having good dreams or at the time of death and other 
times. 

4. Power belongs entirely to Allah; He is the Owner of Control. Those things that are worshipped besides Him have no 
reality. 

5. The verses encourage reflecting over Allah’s creation, because that leads to faith in Him and His Oneness. 

6. The verses show the serious offence of disbelief committed by the person who attributes a child to Allah. 

7. It is unlawful to lie about Allah; and the person who does so will never be successful. 

8. The things that the disbelievers enjoy in this world are considered little because of the punishment that awaits them. A 
believer should not be deceived by this. 





















1 

r\v 

*riWjt V 



=>y> <uu\ ^£*s aj^ ol(jJ.ljL*^3ic- 



$y dg ($) 5L' 

| ($) ^ JpSl IjjS/^ o! 

Cjt^ 


I 


© Relate, O Messenger, to these denying idolaters 
the story of Noah (peace be with him) when he said 
to his people: O my people, if my being amongst 
you is hard for you, and my reminding you of Al¬ 
lah’s signs and advising you is too difficult, and you 
have resolved to kill me, so I place my reliance in 
Allah alone to make your plots fail. So make a firm 
decision about your matter: resolve to destroy me 
and call your Allahs to help you and do not let your 
plot be an obscure secret. After your plan to kill me, 
go ahead and finish what you secretly intend and do 
not give me a moment of respite. 

® If you ignore my invitation, then you know that 
I have not asked for any reward from you for my 
conveying the message of my Lord to you. My re¬ 
ward is only from Allah, whether you have faith in 
me or not. Allah has instructed me to be of those 
who devote themselves to Him with obedience and 
good actions. 

@ Noah’s people denied him and did not accept 
him. I therefore saved him and those believers who 
were with him in the ship. I made them the suc¬ 
cessors of those before them; and I destroyed those 

W 

by means of the Flood. So reflect, O Messenger, 
over the fate of the people who were warned by 
Noah (peace be with him) but did not believe. 

® Then, after a period of time, We sent, after Noah, 
messengers to their people. The messenger came to 
their communities with overwhelming miracles and 
pure laws. But they had no intention to believe on 
account of their previous insistence on rejection of 
the messengers. Allah therefore sealed their hearts. 
Just as We sealed the hearts of the followers of the messengers of the past We will seal the hearts of the disbelievers who 
overstep Allah’s limits by committing disbelief in every time and place. 

® After a period of time, following these messengers, I sent Moses and his brother, Aaron, to Pharaoh, the king of Egypt, 
and the nobles from his people. I sent them with miracles indicating their truthfulness, but the people of Pharaoh were too 
proud to accept what the messengers brought. They were a sinful people because of their disbelief in Allah and rejection 
of His messengers. 

© When the truth was brought by Moses and Aaron (peace be upon them) to Pharaoh and the nobles from his people, 
they said: These miracles - of the staff and the hand - that Moses has brought is clear magic and is not the revealed truth. 
@ Moses said to them in disapproval: Are you calling the truth, when it has come to you, magic? Never! This is not 
magic. I know that a magician can never be successful, so why would I practise magic? 

® The people of Pharaoh gave Moses the following response: Have you brought this magic to turn us away from the 
religion we found our fathers following, so that you and your brother can gain control of us? We are not going to believe 
you two, O Moses and Aaron. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The verses encourage looking at the example of the people of the past because there are many lessons and warnings 
in their history. 

2. The weapon of the believers when facing their enemies is reliance on Allah. 

3. Believers should seek the reward of their calling to Allah only from Him except in the case of necessity, when one may 
ask for a wage for food/drink etc. 

4. The fate of a believer is salvation and success whereas the fate of a disbeliever is loss and punishment. 

5. Persistence in disbelief and rejection of the messengers results in the hearts being sealed and unable to ever accept 
faith. 

6. The condition of the enemies of the messengers is the same: they always describe guidance as magic or lies. 

7. A magician will never succeed. 


^ ^ 

^ Yunus 217 Part 11 





















tl) i 9 

Jlj \ j2\ UIs0^S)^Ija >iAtA 5 is 


|| ^^\l\/&^'^\ iff 

lo^v (3^ ^o-A 

o\^^^lfy J \|30 Oi-lr-^ 3 ^ jAJjS JfJ ^' 4 
(m*) Oi^r^ ^A-L*3 3 -*% ^L*i «- I 





Ijp Pharaoh said to his people, ‘Bring me every per¬ 
son who is knowledgeable and skilled in magic’. 

@ When the magicians were brought to Pharaoh, 

Moses (peace be upon him) said to them with full 
faith that he would defeat them, ‘Throw down, O 
magicians, whatever you have to throw’. 

(j§j) When they threw down their magical spells, 

Moses (peace be upon him) said to them: What you 
have shown is magic. Allah will cause what you 
have done to be nothing and of no effect. You cause 
corruption on earth by means of your magic and 
Allah does not set right the action of a person who 
causes corruption. 

((J} Allah will establish the truth and give it weight 
with His words of decree and with the proof and ev¬ 
idence contained in His words of law, even though 
the sinful disbelievers from the people of Pharaoh 
dislike it. 

(j|j) The people resolved to turn away and none ac¬ 
cepted Moses (peace be upon him), despite the open 
miracles and clear proof he brought, besides a few 
youth from his people, the Israelites. Those who 
persisted in rejection did so out of fear that Phar¬ 
aoh and the nobles from his people would turn them 
away from their faith by imposing a punishment on 
them if they came to know of their belief. Pharaoh 
was high-handed in his authority over Egypt and 
its people, and he was of those who overstepped 
the limit with respect to disbelief and in killing and 
punishing the Israelites. 

{§} Moses (peace be upon him) said to his people, 

‘O my people, if you have true faith in Allah, place 
your reliance in Him alone, if you have submitted. 

Placing reliance in Allah will protect you from harm and will bring you good’. 

(Sjjj) They responded to Moses (peace be upon him) and said to him: In Allah alone we place our trust. O our Lord, do not 
give the wrongdoers power over us because they will try to take us away from our religion by inflicting punishments on 
us, by killing us and by tempting us. 

(Sjl Rescue us through Your mercy, O our Lord, from the hands of the people of Pharaoh who are disbelievers, because 
they have made us into slaves and have harmed us by inflicting punishments on us and by killing us. 

(SjjS) I revealed to Moses and his brother, Aaron (peace be upon them), that they should select and make homes for their 
people to worship Me alone; that they should make their homes face the direction of the qiblah (which was then Jeru¬ 
salem); and that they should perform the ritual prayer with perfection. I also told Moses to inform the believers of news 
that will please them: the news of My assistance and support for them; My destruction of their enemy; and My making 
them successors on earth. 

Moses (peace be upon him) said: O our Lord, You have given Pharaoh and the nobles from his people the glitz and 
glamour of this world. You have also given them wealth in this worldly life; but they were not grateful to You for what 
You gave them. Instead, they used that to mislead others from Your path. O our Lord, utterly destroy their wealth. Make 
their hearts hard so that they do not believe, unless they see the painful punishment at a time when their belief will be of 
no benefit to them. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Having trust in Allah and His assistance should be among the qualities of a strong believer. 

2. Eventually, truth will be victorious no matter how high and overpowering falsehood becomes. 

3. It is obligatory to place trust in Allah and to rely on Him alone. 

4. The verses explain the importance of prayer and that it is one of the qualities of those who rely on Allah. 

5. Establishing the ritual prayer is paramount and it is an obligation in all revealed religions and in all circumstances. 

6. It is acceptable in the sacred law to make a prayer against an oppressor. 























j\i 



?^3$5i&\i0J&-j <0^sA yji 

^==J f\ Ti\j^>-^Ii3 \lJo ->» iJ^TJ *Oj£yi 
04. *^ cLX^af-.Xaj 

ca ^ j 65 Uvte Je€^l^L%> 4j§ 

c3 ^ 4^*1^) 

ce o 

5^-i3i 5i0_^oS -uiit &$&l 

<$>&■£$ spd^^jL^^itMl® 
Ijg ($)>-J,^^-Lj<J^i^ lV^ 3 ^^ t 3 j 


u 




o 


jp Allah said to Moses and Aaron that He had ac¬ 
cepted their prayer against Pharaoh and the nobles 
from his people. He instructed them to remain firm 
on their religion and not to deviate from it by fol¬ 
lowing the path of the ignorant ones who do not 
know the path of truth. 

@ I made the Israelites safely cross the sea after I 
split it open. Pharaoh and his troops pursued them 
out of oppression and enmity. Then, when the sea 
closed on him, bringing them to the point of drown¬ 
ing and he lost all hope of being saved, he said, ‘I 
believe that there is no being worthy of worship 
besides the One Whom the Israelites have accept¬ 
ed, and I am one of those who submit to Allah by 
following Him’. 

Since repentance is not accepted at the time when a 
person sees death, Allah said: 

@ Do you believe now after losing hope of life? 
You, O Pharaoh, had gone against Allah before the 
punishment by disbelieving in Him and preventing 
others from His path and you were one of those 
who spread corruption because of your own mis¬ 
guidance and your leading others astray. 

@ So today I will take you out, O Pharaoh, from 
the sea and place you on a high piece of ground 
so that those who come after you can take a lesson 
from you. But many people are unmindful of My 
proof and evidence indicating My power, and they 
do not reflect over them. 

@> I settled the Israelites in a fine and excellent 
place in the blessed lands of the Levant; and I pro¬ 
vided them with pure and lawful provision. They 
did not differ in the matter of religion until the 
Qur’an came to them confirming what they read in the Torah about the description of Muhammad (peace be upon him). 
When they rejected the revelation, their homelands were taken away from them. 

Your Lord, O Messenger, will decide between them on the Day of Judgement regarding the things they differed about; 
and He will repay those who were on truth, as well as those who were false, with what they deserve. 

If you, O Messenger, are in doubt or confusion about the reality of the Qur’an that I have revealed to you, then ask 
those Jews who read the Torah and the Christians who read the Gospel to confirm it. They will tell you that what was 
revealed to you is the truth because they have the description of it in their scriptures. The truth, about which there is no 
doubt, has come to you from your Lord, so do not be of those who have doubt. 

@ Do not be of those who deny Allah’s proof and evidence, because that will make you one of those who have lost their 
own souls by bringing them to the point of destruction because of their disbelief. 

All these warnings are meant to show the seriousness of doubt and denial, despite the fact that the Prophet is protected 
from such things. 

Jjjj) Those against whom Allah’s decree - that they will die as disbelievers due to their insistence on it - is established 
will never believe - 

@ Even if every explanatory or universal sign comes to them, until they witness the painful punishment and believe at a 
time when their belief will not benefit them. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. It is necessary to remain firm on the religion and not to follow the path of those who are sinful. 

2. The repentance of a person whose soul is about to leave the body is not accepted, nor is the repentance of the person 
who witnesses the beginning of a divine punishment. 

3. The Jews and Christians knew the attributes of the Prophet (peace be upon him), but pride and stubbornness prevented 
them from accepting him. 


Part 11 





























au\ 




j 4 i.o<3^ W3($i 

oife §: 

i J~&y?0^'3^~ 444^ jM ^5jj^xJ j-4^(^) 

4^ |£ 

r.yjfedij ' 


@ Never did a town to which I sent messengers to 
believe in faith validly and beneficially and before 
seeing the punishment, except the people of Jonah. 

When they truly accepted faith, I removed the pun¬ 
ishment of disgrace and humiliation from them in 
the worldly life, and I let them have enjoyment until 
the end of their lives. 

(j|S) If your Lord, O Messenger, had willed for 
everyone on earth to believe, they would have done 
so. However, He did not will it to be so for a wise 
reason. He misguides whomever He wills through 
His justice; and He guides whomever He wills 
through His grace. You do not have the ability to 
force people to become believers: their guidance to 
faith lies only in Allah’s Hands. 

(jf| It is not possible for any soul to believe by itself 
unless Allah permits. Belief only happens with His 
will, so do not lose yourself in grief over them. Al¬ 
lah places suffering and disgrace on those who do 
not apply their minds to His proof, instructions and 
prohibitions. 

HI Say, O Messenger, to the idolaters who ask you 
for signs: Think about the signs that are in the heav¬ 
ens and the earth, which indicate Allah’s Oneness 
and power. 

Sending down signs and messengers are of no use 
for people who will not believe because of their in¬ 
sistence on disbelief. 

(jfl Are these denying people waiting for something 
similar to what Allah imposed on the past commu¬ 
nities who had denied? Say, O Messenger, to them, 

‘Wait for Allah’s punishment. I too am waiting with 
you for Allah’s promise’. 

(jf| Then I will send down the punishment on them and I will save My messengers and those of faith with them, so that 
they are not injured by what hurts their people. Just as I saved those messengers and the believers with them, I will most 
certainly save Allah’s Messenger and the believers with him, which is My duty to them. 

(jl| Say, O Messenger: O people, if you are in doubt about my religion which I call you towards, the religion of monothe¬ 
ism, then I am certain of your religion being false and I will therefore not follow it. I will not worship those whom you 
worship besides Allah, but I will only worship Allah, the One Who will cause you to die. He has instructed me to be of 
those who are sincere to Him in religion. 

|f| He has likewise instructed me to remain firm on the true religion, inclining away from all other religions, and He has 
prohibited me from being one of those who associate partners with Him. 

HI Do not worship, O Messenger, besides Allah, the idols and false Allahs that have no ability to benefit others, nor can 
they inflict harm on others. If you worship them, you will then be one of the wrongdoers who breaks Allah’s right and 
the right of their own souls. 

Beneficial Points: 

1. Faith is the way a person rises to the highest ranks and enjoys the life of this world. 

2. No one has the ability to make someone accept faith, because this is reserved for Allah alone. 

3. The verses prove the power of Allah’s will, and that nothing happens without His permission and will. 

4. Signs and warnings are of no benefit to a person who is insistent on disbelief and persists in it. 

5. Faith will save the believer and disbelief will destroy the disbeliever. 

6. It is necessary to be firm on the true religion and to completely distance oneself from idolatry and false religions. 


44 Js 



















( )Ug. ** f 0 

2 1?^ iLiw^ij ok$ 

V^*L-js <j£'©\ QjIsJs 0 \5*i 

J-L J/j ,1 A^JiJ ->5-£J L->^ l> -CA \ / >^3 J}3j> <j-5. 

&5i 



o 1 ? 0 JLrL^ 

o^ij <^-^(3^ ^\\3Lii»-\i>^5^4^l\yJ^5 Jhp 

0,Q\'Ss>££& j»xC\ yy o^j 3 aV^J-t^ 5 <£$y 

^4>^S i i)py^j^%£r® <3l0-^-|" 

1^1/ ^ ^ ^-JO 

o\ Jo^Ap jk)\^ Jjli^oLa 5 CL?y^k^jX^i 

Part 11 |^S 


@ If Allah afflicts you, O Messenger, with a dis¬ 
aster and you desire to remove it, then know that 
no one can remove it except Him, may He be glo¬ 
rified. If He wants ease for you, then there is no 
one who can repel His grace. He makes His grace 
reach whomever He wills of His servants. No one 
can compel Him. He is Forgiving and Merciful to 
those of His servants who repent to Him. 

(|f| Say, O Messenger: O people, the Qur’an has 
come to you as a revelation from your Lord. Who¬ 
ever follows the right path and has faith in it, the 
benefit of that will return to him, because Allah is 
in no need of the obedience of His servants. Yet 
whoever strays, the effect of his straying will only 
harm him, because Allah is not affected by the dis¬ 
obedience of His servants. I am not a guardian over 
you, to watch over your actions and to take you to 
account for them. 

|p Follow, O Messenger, what your Lord reveals to 
you and act on it. Be patient with the harms caused 
by those who oppose you from your people, whilst 
you convey the message as instructed. Remain firm 
on this path until Allah passes judgement with re¬ 
spect to them: by giving you victory over them in 
the world and by punishing them in the Afterlife, if 
they die as disbelievers. 

HOd (SOrah Hud) 


® Themes of the Surah: 

There is an explanation of how the messengers con¬ 
veyed their message to people who denied them. 


® Explanation: 

|p The discussion on the meaning of such verses has been previously mentioned in Surah Al-Baqarah. The Qur’an is 
a book whose verses have been perfectly constructed, in which you will see no flaw nor any deficiency. Then it was 
explained by mention of the lawful and unlawful, instructions and prohibitions, promises and threats, narrations etc. It is 
from the One Who is Wise in His handling of affairs and legislation and Who is Aware of the condition of His servants 
and what is in their best interests. |p These verses revealed to Muhammad (peace be upon him) prohibit people from 
worshipping anyone besides Allah. I, O people, warn you of Allah’s punishment if you disbelieve in Him and do not obey 
Him; and I give you good news of His reward if you have faith in Him and practise His sacred law. @ Seek, O people, 
forgiveness for your sins from your Lord and repent to Him with remorse over your shortcomings. He will give you good 
provision in this worldly life until the end of your fixed lifespan. He will give every person who has merit, by following 
Him and doing good, a full reward for such behaviour without any decrease. If you turn away from having faith in what 
I have brought from my Lord, then I fear for you the punishment of a day whose horrors are intense, which is the Day 
of Judgement. ((J) To Allah alone is your return, O people, on the Day of Judgement and He, may He be glorified, has 
power over everything. Nothing is outside His ability. It is not difficult for Him to give you life and take you to account 
after you die and are raised up. ||j) These idolaters bend their backs and lower their heads in order to hide from Allah’s 
Messenger (peace be upon him). When they cover their heads with their clothing so that Allah’s Messenger (peace be 
upon him) does not see them, turning away from what he brought, Allah knows what they conceal and what they reveal. 
He knows the intentions that are in the heart. Nothing is hidden from Him. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Good and bad, benefit and harm, are all in Allah’s Hand and no one else’s. 2. It is necessary to follow the Book and the 
Sunnah, to be patient over harm and to wait for relief from Allah. 3. The verses of the Qur’an are perfectly constructed 
and no flaws or falsehood can be found in them. The laws it contains have been explained in full. 4. The aim of the verses 
of the Qur’an is to prohibit people from worshipping anyone besides Allah. 5. It is necessary to hurry towards repentance 
and to show remorse for sins in order to achieve what is desired and to be safe from what is feared. 




















> > 


YYY 




C%-U 'iLa—P ^LaJ \ (_^p j Aj^£- 

^\5>\ -!50ov>J 51 

<3\^j 

^ <£sf\ *Jj J;^ 

_J$>c3 

>^3 aij L&^ uM %0 

| icl^L^J^j^ 0 . eJliis ( ^ ) ^a^==^j^j \j-S^ 
l\^~}\ jA^jiC' JjT'g \jJyL> <3 -4i -k^<i.4j OiWA? 


>l^oj l^3J)j 4^\ Jp'i \ c|>S^ Cr^^j * 


A-?^ 6^* 




Up There is no creature that walks on the surface of 
the earth, whatever it may be, except that Allah has 
undertaken, through His grace, to provide for it. He, 
may He be glorified, knows where it lives on earth 
and He knows where it will die. The provision, 
place of living and place of death for everything - 
including creatures - are in a clear book, which is 
the Preserved Tablet. 

© He, may He be glorified, is the One Who cre¬ 
ated the heavens and the earth in their magnificent 
form, and He created whatever is in them in a peri¬ 
od of six days. Before He created them, His Throne 
was on water. He created all of this in order to test 
which of you, O people, is best in doing actions that 
please Allah and which of you does actions that an¬ 
ger Him. He will repay each group according to 
what they deserve. If you, O Messenger, say, ‘You, 

O people, will be resurrected after you die to be tak¬ 
en to account’, then those who disbelieve in Allah 
and reject the resurrection will say, ‘This Qur’an 
that you recite is nothing but sheer magic and it is 
clearly false’. 

UfJ) If I postpone the punishment that the idolaters 
deserve in this world for a period of a few days, 
they will attempt to mock the punishment by asking 
for it to come quickly, by saying, ‘What is it that is 
holding the punishment back from us?’ Of course, 
the punishment that they deserve has a fixed time 
with Allah, and on the day when it comes to them 
they will not find anyone to avert it from them. In¬ 
stead, the punishment that they used to poke fun at 
by asking for it to come quickly will fall upon them 
and surround them. 

@ If I give man a blessing from Me, such as health or wealth, and then I take away that blessing from him, he loses all 
hope of My mercy and becomes extremely ungrateful for My blessings, which he forgets when they are taken away. 

{§} If I let such a person have much provision and good health, after having experienced poverty and illness, he will say, 
‘My troubles have gone and my difficulty is over’. He does not thank Me for such blessings, but instead he becomes 
boastful and vain, holding his head high with pride over people because of what I have blessed him with. 

@ This is the case with all people except those who are patient in hard times, do good actions and leave sins. Such 
good people are different to the arrogant ones described previously, as they do not lose hope in hard times, nor are they 
ungrateful for Allah’s blessings and nor are they arrogant. So they will receive forgiveness for their sins from their Lord 
and they will receive a great reward in the Afterlife. 

@ Perhaps you, O Messenger, because of their disbelief, stubbornness and demand for signs, will leave out conveying 
some of what Allah has instructed you to convey because they will find it difficult to practise; and perhaps your heart will 
be reluctant to convey it, so that they do not say, ‘Why has no rich treasure been sent down to him or why has no angel 
come with him to confirm his truthfulness?’ Do not leave some of what is revealed to you because of that. You are only a 
wamer who conveys what Allah has instructed you to convey. You do not have to bring the signs they request for. Allah 
takes care of everything. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The verses show how vast Allah’s knowledge is and that He has taken it on Himself to provide for all of His creation, 
including human beings, animals, and other than them. 

2. The reason for creation is here explained: to test the servants’ obedience of Allah’s instructions and avoidance of His 
prohibitions. 

3. A person should not be deceived by Allah’s granting respite to those who commit sin: He may seize them suddenly, 
when they are unaware. 

4. The verses show man’s condition in the case of both prosperity and hardship, and the believer who is patient and 
grateful is praised. 




Hud 


222 


Part 12 





















A ? 




Oi-s 


bli$& 


o 


,U\ 


0Jj 


cy* 'yo'j 


J-jAS C>* 0 6j^ 

^4-^.>~43 i LLc l c^ojj ij 

•JiiP>-fLijnJji ^ 0 5>^~A | 

0^D _. 

^-^-POcJ aL«J_aLwi K 

X E ^ ^ ^*4 ^ > " * 


© Do the idolaters say that Muhammad made up 
the Qur’an, and that it is not revelation from Allah? 
Allah tells the Messenger (peace and blessing be 
upon him) to challenge them to write ten similar 
surahs themselves like the Qur’an, and to call upon 
whomever they could call upon to help them to do 
this, if they were telling the truth in claiming that 
the Qur’an was fabricated. 

© If they do not bring what the Messenger chal¬ 
lenges them to - and they are unable to do it! - then 
the believers should know with certainty that the 
Qur’an is revealed from Allah by His knowledge to 
His Messenger, and that it is not fabricated, and that 
there is no true Allah except for Him. Allah asks 
whether you surrender to Him in devotion after 
these conclusive proofs? 

© Whoever desires the life of this world and its 
passing pleasures through what they do, and does 
not desire the Afterlife through their actions, Allah 
will give them the reward for their actions in this 
world: health, safety and ample provision. They 
will not be short-changed in the reward for their 
actions in any way. 

© Such people with this blameworthy aspiration 
will not have any reward on the Day of Judgement, 
except for the fire of Hell, which they will enter; 
and the reward of their actions will disappear, and 
their actions will be useless, because they were not 
based on faith or on a valid intention, and they did 
not desire the countenance of Allah and the home of 
the Afterlife through their actions. 

© The Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him) 
has a clear proof from His Lord, the Exalted, which 
is the noble Qur’an that testifies to the truth of what he says; and the Torah, revealed to Moses (peace be upon him), also 
testifies to the truth of his prophethood. He was sent as a guide and a mercy to people. He and those who believe with 
him are not the same as the disbelievers, who wander aimlessly in error; for they believe in the Qur’an and in Muhammad 
(peace and blessings be upon him), to whom the Qur’an was revealed. As for those who disbelieve in it from the different 
groups, the fire of Hell will be their promised destination on the Day of Judgement. So the Messenger (peace be upon 
him)should not be in any doubt about the Qur’an, and about their destination, because it is the truth, in which there is no 
doubt. However, most people do not have faith, despite the coming together of clear signs and evidence. 

©No one is a greater wrongdoer than someone who makes up a lie about Allah, associating a partner or a son with Him. 
Those who make up lies about Allah will be brought before their Lord on the Day of Judgement to be asked about their 
actions, and the witnesses against them, from among the angels and the messengers, will say that they were the ones who 
lied about Allah by attributing a partner or son to Him. Allah’s depriving them of His mercy is due to their lies about 
Allah. 

© Those who turn people away from Allah’s straight path, and want it to be twisted from its straightness so that, who 
deny that they will be brought back to life after death - 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Allah’s challenge to the idolaters is to produce ten surahs like the Qur’an; and it is highlighted that they will be unable 
to do this. 

2. Even if the disbeliever is given what they desire in this world, it will be meaningless when they only have the fire of 
Hell in the Afterlife. 

3. It is demonstrated that the Muslims who have a clear sign from their Lord are not the same as those without a clear sign, 
who only follow each other blindly and in ignorance, such as the disbelievers with their idols. 

4. The great sin of someone who makes up a lie about Allah is clearly emphasised. 



i J-ri’yji aJ^ \ 


Part 12 














]£~^<>jft 3Jj\ 0ZjJ^\y\^^^l3\ 

•Mfe' 


«• 0l($)0 T\ <J 




/-<^C- ^ ^ ^ 7 ^ _ S' 6 s' '^\'^ > s 


\ fc liijy \la ^ SLi \ J \j^ 

i£$^3& 3 Ll^Li^UJ 




@ Such people cannot escape from Allah in this 
world if He wills to send down a punishment on 
them, and they have no protectors besides Al¬ 
lah who could stop the punishment of Allah from 
reaching them. Their punishment on the Day of 
Judgement will be increased because they turned 
away themselves and turned others away from Al¬ 
lah’s path. In this world, they were not able to hear 
the truth and guidance and accept it, and they did 
not see the signs of Allah in the universe in a way 
that was beneficial to them, because of their strong 
aversion to the truth. 

@ These are people who have lost themselves, 
heading towards their own ruin through associating 
partners with Allah; and the partners and interces¬ 
sors they have invented will abandon them. 

{§} It is certain that on the Day of Judgement they 
will be the greatest losers, because they exchanged 

faith for disbelief, the Afterlife for the world, and f 4 V A\\^ * \3\ ^ (**\ 

mercy for suffering. «£§ ^ -X&j sM 

Those who have faith in Allah and His messen¬ 
gers, and who do good actions, are humble and fear 
Allah, they are the companions of Paradise, where 
they will live eternally. 

{§} The examples of the two groups - the disbe¬ 
lievers and the believers - are, firstly, like the blind 
who do not see and the deaf who do not hear: where 
it is the disbelievers who do not hear and accept the 
truth, and do not see in a way that is beneficial to 
them; and secondly, like someone who can hear and 
see: where it is the believers who can both hear and 
see. Are these two groups the same in their state and 
in their qualities? They are not the same. Will you 
not consider how truly different they are to each 
other? 

When the turning away from the faith by the idolaters became clear, Allah consoled His Prophet (peace be upon him), 
saying that he was not the first who had been rejected, and then He mentioned the stories of other prophets who had been 
treated in a similar way: 

jj} I sent Noah (peace be upon him) as a messenger to his people. Noah told them that he was sent to warn them about 
Allah’s punishment, whilst making very clear the message he had been sent to them with. 

Noah called his people to worship Allah alone, and not to worship any besides Him, because he feared the punishment 
of a painful day for them. 

@ The nobility and leaders of Noah’s people said that they would not respond to his call, saying that he was no better than 
them, being a man like them, and that they only saw the least important people among them following him straightaway 
upon a simple suggestion, without considering carefully or examining the situation. They said that the believers were not 
more noble or wealthy than them, nor did they have a higher rank than them, which might make them worthy of being 
followed by them; rather, they considered them to be lying in their claims. 

(j|) Noah asked his people to tell him whether he and the believers would be able to enter faith into his people’s hearts 
against their will if he had a clear proof from his Lord, showing that what he said was the truth, and that they must believe 
him? They would be unable to do so, because it is Allah alone Who gives people faith. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The disbeliever does not benefit from his hearing or his sight in a way that leads him to faith, so it is as if he does not 
have them at all, unlike the believer. 

2. Allah’s custom with the followers of the messengers is that they are largely poor and weak, while their adversaries are 
largely important people and leaders. 

3. The verses demonstrate the pride of most of those who are important and are leaders, who look down on others. 






















j 


in* 





p i»S 




\ ji~ 


~^-Xup 



@ Noah told his people that he did not ask for 
any payment for the delivery of his message: his 
reward would only be from Allah. He would not 
drive away the poor among the believers, who the 
disbelievers asked to be removed from his compa¬ 
ny. They will be meeting their Lord on the Day of 
Judgement, and Allah will reward them for their 
faith. Noah said that he saw them as a people who 
did not understand the reality of what he was call¬ 
ing them to when they asked him to drive away the 


<j>[ Jp* weak people among the believers. 

^ ^ ^ ^ t @ Noah asked his people about who would be able 

I Ss>r3s ^ 1 j [ 

<j\ ij>&\ 0^01^===^ C)\c^Sj\ o\j 



^ ^ ^ 't y ^ 



Hud 


225 


Part 12 


to protect him from Allah’s punishment if he drove 
away these poor believers unjustly for no crime. 
Would they not reflect and strive for what was best 
and of most benefit to themselves? 

@ Noah told his people that he would not say 
that he had the treasuries of Allah, which he could 
spend on them if they believed; and he would not 
say to them that he had knowledge of the Ghaib. 
He would not say to them that he was an angel, be¬ 
cause he was a man like them; nor would he say of 
the poor people, whom they scorned and thought of 
as inferior to them, that Allah would not give them 
success and guidance: Allah knew best their inten¬ 
tions and their states. If Noah claimed any of these 
things, then he would be among the wrongdoers, 
deserving of Allah’s punishment. 

@ Noah’s people said to him, out of stubbornness 
and pride, that he had debated and disputed long 
enough, and told him to bring them the punishment 
he had promised them, if he was telling the truth in 
what he claimed. 

@ Noah said to them that he could not bring the punishment upon them, and that only Allah would bring it to them, if 
He willed; and that they would not be able to escape from the punishment of Allah if He willed for them to be given a 
punishment. 

Noah told them that his advice and counsel would not benefit them if Allah willed that they be led astray from the 
right path, and if He willed to leave them without guidance because of their stubbornness. He was their Lord and it was 
He Who had control over their lives, so He would lead them astray if He willed; and to Him alone they would be returned 
on the Day of Judgement, when they would be repaid for their actions. 

{J} The disbelief of Noah’s people led them to claim that he had made up something about Allah with this faith that he 
brought to them. Allah told His messenger to say to them that if he had invented it, then he would be a wrongdoer and the 
punishment of his crime would fall upon him alone; and if they rejected the truth he brought them, out of stubbornness 
and pride, then they were the wrongdoers, and he was not responsible for their crime in any way, but was innocent of it. 
@ Allah revealed to Noah that none of his people would believe, except those who already believed; and He told him not 
to be saddened by their rejection and ridicule over the many years. 

@ Allah told Noah to build the Ark, under His observation and protection; and with His inspiration, He taught him how 
to build it. He told him not to address Him with a request to give time to those who wronged themselves through their 
disbelief. They would be drowned, inevitably, in the Flood, as a consequence of persisting in their disbelief. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Someone who calls to Allah hopes for a reward from Him alone. 

2. It is forbidden to drive away poor believers, and they must be treated with generosity and honour. 

3. Knowledge of the Ghaib is Allah’s alone. 

4. Debate and argumentation with those who deny the truth is religiously legitimate. 

5. Advice will not benefit someone if Allah does not will for them to be guided. 























> > ^ J. 


m 




£ 0 
\ f ~ \ J. 
AX*l£^>C-u<J <£ A£ 



\j_J^>SL^ 0 ^. 3 ^ | 

<j>\\& Ac- Cj^ 

uy&\ a 3^>,3>^ <j^X ^e^WXj clA^-Jj 0 Vi==^ 

==)\ cj\|j *($)(JX?^ \?A^-a iLaj «.£y°j 

3 _5^X 43 



4d>lr' 


(|p Noah followed the command of his Lord, and 
immediately started building the Ark. Whenever 
the leaders and noblemen among his people passed 
by, they made fun of him, because he was building 
the Ark and there was no water or rivers around. 

When they continued to mock him, he said to these 
important people that if they mocked him and his 
people today when they were building the Ark, they 
also mocked them because of their ignorance of the 
fact that they would be drowned. 

@ Noah told them that they would come to know 
who would be punished in this world in a way that 
disgraced and humiliated them, and upon whom 
the eternal punishment would come on the Day of 
Judgement. 

@ Noah (peace be upon him) finished building the 
Ark that Allah had commanded him to build. Then 
His command came to destroy them, and the water 
boiled up from the furnace they used to bake in, 
signalling the beginning of the Flood. Allah told 
Noah (peace be upon him) to take on board the 
Ark a pair of every type of animal on the earth, a 
male and a female, and to take his family, except 
for those who it had already been determined would 
drown because they did not believe. He was told to 
also take those who believed with him from among 
his people. Only a small number from his people 
believed with him, despite the long period of time 
he had remained among them calling them to have 
faith in Allah. 

@ Noah said to those who believed among his 
family and his people to board the Ark, and that its 
sailing and landing would be in the name of Allah, 
saying that his Lord was Forgiving of the sins of those of His servants who repent to Him, and was Compassionate with 
them. By His mercy to the believers, He saved them from being destroyed. 

@ The Ark sailed with the people and animals in it, through the great waves like mountains. Noah (peace be upon him) 
called to his son, who did not believe, and who was isolated from his father and his people in some place. Noah told him 
to believe, and to get onto the Ark with them so that he would be saved from the Flood; and he told him not to be with the 
disbelievers, or he would be drowned as they would be. 

@ Noah’s son said to him that he would take refuge on a high mountain so that the water could not reach him. Noah told 
his son that nothing would save anyone from Allah’s punishment of being drowned by the Flood, except those who Allah 
would save in His mercy. A wave came between Noah and his disbelieving son, and his son was drowned by the Flood 
because of his disbelief. 

@ After the Flood, Allah told the earth to absorb the water, and He told the sky to hold back and not send down rain; 
and so the water decreased, until the land became dry. By then, Allah had destroyed the disbelievers. The Ark stopped on 
Mount Judl. It was said, ‘Be gone and destroyed the people of disobedience, for they had overstepped the limits of Allah 
through their disbelief. 

@ Noah (peace be upon him)called upon his Lord, saying that his son was of his family, whom He had promised him 
would be saved. He said that Allah’s promise is always true and that Allah is the most just of judges Who knows best. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The idolaters are in the habit of mocking and sneering at the prophets and their followers. 

2. The custom of Allah with people is that most of them do not have faith. 

3. The story of Noah with his people shows the truth of Allah’s promise to them that they would be drowned and de¬ 
stroyed. 


62 0^-3 \ <3 IXXX 

J 3&J ^ lS (£) AjO 

2==lXi 




















YYV 






3\k@JjJ Sfe&Jd^J j.i££lz£z]j 

cJj\ \^S!£> o^==\^> «L^ (Si 

( ft ) A-Jal*^ l $Cf±Zo& \ Jlte ijr* Su*& 

b 5^ ^Ic^L} 

1^3 {jf' &\ 

(^ ^L^JLJiS <JpSl ). <2£>>J oi^>=^ 

^ys^j ^k=c(j> ^}j> £ 4>4i \j\ 5 j 4 . 

15 i^jai^u 4 <445 a®, 

0 S?hHJ^^o^Sj 45® 

Hud 227 Part 12 ^ ^PH 1 



© Allah said to Noah that his son, who he asked 
Him to save, was not from his family, whom He 
had promised to save, because he was a disbeliever. 
Noah’s question was not appropriate coming from 
him, and was not right for someone of his rank. Al¬ 
lah told him not to ask Him about what he had no 
knowledge about, cautioning him not to be among 
those who are ignorant, by asking Him for things 
that go against His knowledge and wisdom. 

® Noah (peace be upon him) asked his Lord to 
help him by preventing him from asking Him for 
what he had no knowledge about. He said that if 
Allah did not forgive him his sin, and have mercy 
on him, then he would be among the losers who lost 
their share in the Afterlife. 

@ Allah told Noah (peace be upon him) to get 
down from the Ark on to the ground in safety and 
security, and with many blessings from Allah upon 
him and on the believing descendants of those who 
were with him on the Ark, who would come after 
them. There would also be other peoples from their 
descendants who would disbelieve whom Allah 
would for a time give enjoyment in the life of this 
world, giving them their livelihood, but then a pain¬ 
ful punishment from Him would come to them. 

@ This story of Noah is from the news of the 
Ghaib, which the Messenger (peace be upon him) 
did not know beforehand, and his people did not 
have knowledge of it either before this revelation 
from Allah. Allah tells him to be patient in the face 
of the injury and rejection of his people, just as 
Noah (peace be upon him) was patient. Help and 
victory is for those who follow what Allah instructs 


and who stay away from what He has prohibited. 

(jp Allah sent to the people of ‘Ad their brother Hud (peace be upon him). He told them to worship Allah alone, and not 
to associate anyone with Him. He told them that they had no real Allah other than Him, glory be to Him, and that they 
were not telling the truth in claiming that he had a partner. 

@ Hud told his people that he asked for no reward from them for what he conveyed from his Lord, calling them to it, 
and that his reward was only from Allah Who created him. Would they not think about this, and respond to what he called 
them to? 

@ Hud told his people to ask for forgiveness from Allah, and to repent to Him, away from their sins, the biggest of 
which was associating others with Him. He would reward them by sending abundant rain, and would add strength to their 
strength by increasing their descendants and wealth. He told them not to turn away from what he was calling them to, 
because they would then be wrongdoers due to their disbelief in Allah and rejection of what he brought to them. 

@ Hud’s people said to him that he had not brought them clear proof that would make them believe him. They said that 
they would not abandon their Allahs because of his word alone without proof, and that they did not believe him in his 
claim that he was a messenger. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Prophets cannot plead on the behalf of those who disbelieve in Allah, even if they are their children. 

2. The verses make clear that the goal of relating the stories of the prophets was to console the Prophet (peace be upon 
him) and the believers. 

3. There is great virtue in asking for forgiveness and turning to Allah, which are reasons for rain being sent down and for 
an increase in descendants and wealth. 





















cbiss (^) L§y. S} 

0 j. “'^ i 4 j^ ^ 

V^A)c>i^ J V* Jyc*jh>\ JCflS 0^($) 

oi^-^ j Jjj 

OlAj 1? -VS-J>o\c- kiifej (^)>LAf> <-j\j& lytJ*Lz£j 
4jAii3^ ^4^ j»-®>^ SjLi elk?*^?> it> -4^ ^tai) J^i) 


3>i 


@ Hud’s people told him that some of their Allahs 
had afflicted him with madness because he had told 
them not to worship them. Hud told them that he 
called on Allah to witness, and that they too should 
witness, that he was innocent of worshipping the 
Allahs that they worshipped besides Allah. 

$ Hud said, 

He told them to plot against him together with their 
Allahs, which they claimed had afflicted him with 
madness, and not to give him any respite. 

(Sj} Hud told them that he put his trust in Allah and 
relied upon Him alone in everything, because He 
was his Lord and their Lord. He told them that there 
is nothing walking on the face of the earth except 
that it is under His power and control, and He deals 
with it as He wills. He also told them that His Lord 
was true and just, and so would not give them pow¬ 
er over him, since he stood for the truth and they 
stood for falsehood. 

@ He told them that if they continued to turn away 
from what he brought them, then he had no re¬ 
sponsibility to do more than convey the message 
to them. He had delivered to them everything that 
Allah had sent him with and instructed him to con¬ 
vey. The proof would be against them, and his Lord 
would destroy them and bring another people to 
succeed them. They would not do Allah the slight¬ 
est harm through their rejecting and turning away, 
because He has no need of His creation. He told 
them that his Lord watches over all things, and that 
it was He Who protected him from the evil they 
plotted against him. 

(j*} When Allah’s command came to destroy them. 

He saved Hud and those who believed with him by a mercy from Him, and He saved them from a stem punishment given 
to the disbelievers of his people. 

@ Such were the people of ‘Ad. They disbelieved in the signs of Allah, their Lord, and went against His messenger Hud. 
They followed the instruction of every tyrant who was proud against the truth, not accepting it or dedicating themselves 
to it. 

@ They were then cursed with contempt and removed from Allah’s mercy in this world, and on the Day of Judgement 
they will also be without Allah’s mercy. Due to their disbelief in Allah, the Exalted, He distances them from every good 
and allows them to approach every evil. 

@ Allah sent to the people of Thamud their brother Salih. He told his people to worship Allah alone, and that they had no 
Allah worthy of worship other than Him. He created them from the clay of the earth when He created their father Adam 
from it, and made them settle in it. He told them to ask for forgiveness from Him, and that his Lord was Near to those 
who devoted themselves to worshipping Him, responding to their prayers. 

@ Salih’s people said to him that he had had a high position among them before this, and they had hoped he would be 
wise, advising them and counselling them. Did he tell them not to worship what their fathers had worshipped? They said 
that they doubted what he called them to - which was worshipping Allah alone - making them suspect him of making 
things up about Allah. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The call of all the messengers was the same: to worship Allah alone, and not to associate anything with Him. 

2. It is established that the rejection and stubbornness of the idolaters occurs in the same way in every time and place. 


» * » 

_ _«J 




’Uj> ebo ii&z- 






i)\ \£&>W jib J2S \y>rj* j 

















YY^ 




0 


{<p In reply, Salih asked his people to tell him that, 
if he had clear proof from his Lord, and He had 
given him mercy, which was his prophethood, then 
who would protect him from His punishment if he 
went against Him by not delivering what He in¬ 
structed him to deliver to them? They would, then, 
only increase him in error, distancing him from Al¬ 
lah’s pleasure. 

@ Salih told his people about a particular camel 
of Allah’s which was a clear miracle for them, and 
a sign of the truth of what he said. He told them to 
leave her to graze in Allah’s land and not to harm 
her in any way or a punishment would come to 
them near to the time that they harmed her. 

@ They denied what he said and hanned her, push¬ 
ing their denial to extremes. So Salih told them 
to enjoy life in their land for three days from the 
time they harmed her, then the punishment of Allah 
would come to them; and the coming of His pun¬ 
ishment after that was a certain promise that there 
would be no possibility of denying, as it would 
come true. 

@ When Allah’s command came to destroy them, 
He saved Salih and those who had faith with him, 
by a mercy from Him, and He saved them from 
the disgrace and humiliation of that day. Without 
doubt, your Lord is the Powerful, the Mighty Who 
no one can overcome; and therefore He destroyed 
the disbelieving peoples. 

@ The great scream overtook the people of 
Thamud, so that they perished from the strength of 
it; and in the morning, they lay face down upon the 
ground. 

It was as if they had never lived in their land in comfort and ease. Certainly, Thamud disbelieved in Allah, their Lord, 
and so they remain outcasts from His mercy. 

@ Then the angels came to Abraham (peace and blessing be upon him) in the form of men, giving good news to him and 
his wife of Isaac and Jacob. The angels said ‘Peace’, so he replied by saying ‘Peace’. Then he went quickly and brought 
them a roasted calf to eat, thinking that they were men. 

(jp But when Abraham saw that their hands did not reach out for the calf and that they were not eating it, he was confused 
by them, and felt fear of them. When the angels saw his fear of them, they told him not to be afraid, and that they had 
been sent by Allah to the people of Lot to give them their punishment. 

@ Abraham’s wife, Sarah, was standing. Then they told her something that greatly pleased her, that she would bear Isaac, 
and that Isaac would have Jacob. She laughed and was delighted by what she heard. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Allah’s custom with the first peoples was to send them messengers who brought good news and warned them, until the 
proof was against them, then He destroyed those who disbelieved and saved those who had faith. 

2. The sign of Salih (peace be upon him) was one of the greatest signs, but his people did not believe it. 

3. It is highly desirable to give the believers news that brings them joy. 

4. It is correct behaviour to say ‘Peace’ when entering someone’s house and for the hosts to reply in the same way. 

5. The sacred law instructs people to honour their guests. 


* ^ 9 _ _. ^ ^ ^ 9 l 

Ag>-1 ,,, < r ~— j 

{^) OJaSiIj | 

9 ""t ^ ^ 2 s^\s" 

cy^\xX$ \ 515-A? 5 - | 

j U Is ( ^ ) jJq 

I s' ^ f S' f _ _ S' -s' o 9 I 

0 CA3 






















4ji\ c^S^J _j-^\ lyt Vp\S(^) i^SJ 

* 0 y J& <40 ^ ^=z3 

/Z\\Xa JU^Vj^A^ J^J0 vSj^*^\'X^X r^i.0^ 
V^3j» (^) 'a^ 4^ 3>d Lg^\ <=■ 

jCj^cr 

,0 s-W? ^-W^iji 
>-^=^J-4^^ o^ 5 c3.^2 oUi^ o^-*-*£ 

(^) xJuij 

^5^-i (J|t^ ta CU^ip JjiJ \j) \S 
ijS \i Jo jJL { j ^= l ) ^ ^jN^ol^J^($) 

^ ^-g. 

5^i\ S) |a^JJL£==l> \ dr5. 


® When the angels gave Sarah this amazing good 
news, she asked how she could have a child when 
she was an old woman and her husband was also 
advanced in age. Having a child at such an age was 
incredible, and was not normal. 

@ When Sarah was amazed at the news, the angels 
asked her if she was amazed by Allah’s decree and 
command, because people like her know that Allah 
is able to do such things. ‘The mercy of Allah and 
His blessings be upon you, people of Abraham!’ 
they said. Allah is praised in His attributes and ac¬ 
tions, the Possessor of Glory and the Honourable. 

@ After the departure of the fear that Abraham 
(peace be upon him) had felt because of his guests 
not eating his food, the discovery that the guests 
were angels, and receiving the joyous news that he 
would have Isaac, who would have Jacob, he then 
started to debate with the messengers about the 
people of Lot, asking that the punishment for them 
be delayed, and that Lot and his family be saved. 

{§} Abraham was forbearing, wanting to delay the 
punishment, praying often to his Lord, calling upon 
Him, and turning to Him. 

@ The angels told Abraham to leave off debating 
about the people of Lot: the command of his Lord 
had come that they would receive the punishment 
He had decreed for them, and there was a great 
punishment coming to the people of Lot, which no 
debate or prayer could turn back. 

@ When the angels came to Lot in the form of men 
he was distressed by their coming to him, and he 
was upset because he feared for them due to the fact 
that his people went to men with desire instead of 
women. Lot said that it was a terrible day because he thought his people would force themselves on his guests. 

(Sjj) The people of Lot came rushing to him, intending to commit an outrage against his guests. They were used to going 
to men with desire instead of women. In order to put his people off his guests, Lot told them that they should marry the 
women among his people, because they were purer for them than the outrage they committed. He told them to fear Allah 
and not to disgrace him concerning his guests, asking if there was a single right-minded man among them who would tell 
them not to commit such a shameful act. 

@ His people said to him that he knew that they had no need of the women among his people, and no desire, and he knew 
very well what they wanted, as they only desired men. 

Lot said that if only he had strength to use against them or people to support him, then he would be able to come 
between them and his guests. 

@ The angels said to Lot (peace be upon him) that they were messengers sent by Allah, and that his people would not be 
able to touch him with their evil. They told him to leave the town at night, when it was dark, with his family. They said 
that no one should turn to look at what was behind them, except for his wife, who would turn back wrongly, because the 
punishment that would come upon his people would also come upon her. They told Lot that the appointed time for their 
destruction would be the morning, and that it was nearly time. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The virtue and rank of the family of Abraham is clearly demonstrated. 

2. It is established that it is permissible to plead for those whom you hope will have faith before their case is decided by 
Allah. 

3. The story highlights the rank of Abraham (peace be upon him) as the friend of Allah. 

4. The story also shows the atrocious shamefulness of the actions of the people of Lot. 






Hud 


230 


Part 12 






















df§5 When My command to destroy the people of 
Lot came, I turned their towns upside down by rais¬ 
ing and overturning them together with the people; 
and I rained down on them stones of hard-layered 
baked clay that came down one after the other. 
dj§S) These stones were marked by Allah with a spe¬ 
cial sign, and they are not far away from the wrong¬ 
doers of the Quraysh and others. Instead, it is near 
and will come down on them when Allah decrees it 
to come down. 

@ We sent to Madyan their brother, Shu’ayb, who 
said: O my people, worship Allah alone. You have 
no other Allah that deserves to be worshipped be¬ 
sides Him. Do not give people less in the measure 
of volume and weight when you deal with them. I 
see you in prosperity and with blessings, so do not 
change Allah’s favour to you by committing sins. 
I fear for you the punishment of an encompass¬ 
ing day that will reach every one of you and from 
which you will not find any place to run to or seek 
refuge in. @ He said: O my people, give complete 
and just measure of volume and weight when you 
measure for others. Do not cheat people of their 
rights by giving short measure and deceiving them. 
Do not spread corruption on earth by killing and 
committing other sins. 

@ He further said: The lawful that Allah leaves 
for you after giving people their rights in full and 
with fairness is of more benefit and contains more 
blessing than the extra obtained through giving 
short measure and spreading corruption on earth. 
If you are indeed believers, then be content with 
that remainder. It is not my duty to watch over you, 
record your actions and hold you to account for them. The One Who watches over you is the One Who knows all secrets 
and private conversations. 

@ The people of Shu’ayb said to him: O Shu’ayb, does the prayer that you offer instruct you that we should leave the 
worship of the idols our fathers used to worship? Does it instruct you that we should leave dealing in our wealth as we 
wish, and investing it as we wish? You are indeed the sensible and wise person we knew you to be before this invitation. 
What has happened to you? 

@ Shu’ayb said to his people: O my people, tell me what will be your position if I am on clear proof and insight from 
my Lord, and He has given me lawful provision from Him, as well as prophethood? I do not wish to prohibit you from 
something and go against you and do it myself. I only wish to set your matter right, to the best of my ability, by inviting 
you to declare the Oneness of your Lord and to obey Him. My success in achieving this is only with Allah, may He be 
glorified! I place my trust in Him alone and I turn to Him in all my affairs. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Allah’s custom is to destroy the wrongdoers with the most horrific and severe punishment. 

2. It is unlawful to give short measure and to cheat people of their rights. 

3. It is necessary to be satisfied with what is lawful, even if it is little. 

4. It is unlawful to spread any type of corruption on earth. 

5. The verses indicate the virtue of instructing good and prohibiting evil and the necessity of practicing what Allah in¬ 
structs and abstaining from what He prohibits. 




m 




l £ j iC \%J \g^\j l -g-Ul Lfrli.' ol -A 


J U 4$]j. Lie! 3^ 

j ^U\ So 7% 

^ $ ' £ """ | 

lij o dji^d 

1 1$) \ Lo_ 9 La 



















eo 




J' % jzjjj? jlP 

r - o_$ 9 ^ 9 o .*■*•*- o ^ ^ 

1 4^ Ijjii 5 1 >A j^=Cj \$jj^jC~3j 0. ' - " 
l _]yu\jj^Ai^==> AjijoCa i4.^.y»JUljjj lS(^ 4A?JLst5 

OjWwOJ; 






•** T -" m 


d£yc3 >&*k3& 0 
> 5^/4^^==®<S_? 

te , . > ^ 

^ 'C' $ ^ J> "" ^ ^'T 9 <.<'?^ 

Jo_• 

ji]==tju° ^Sy?5p3j 




@ He continued: O my people, do not let your ha- *fcg^ i^\jl£ t V Y l^jgj 

tred for me make you deny what I have brought. 

You should fear that you will suffer like the people 
of Noah, the people of Hud or the people of Salih. 

The people of Lot are not far from you, in time nor 
place. You know what happened to them, so take a 
lesson from that. 

(jl Seek forgiveness from your Lord. Then repent 
to Him from your sins. My Lord is Compassionate 
to those who repent and is Most Loving to those 
who turn to Him. 

@ The people of Shu’ayb said to him: O Shu’ayb, 
we do not understand much of what you have 
brought. We regard you to be weak amongst us, and 
you are not one of the senior leaders. If it were not 
that your family follows our religious beliefs, we 
would have killed you by stoning. To us, you are 
not a person of honour such that we would be afraid 
of killing you. The only reason we did not kill you 
is out of respect for your family. 

(j§J Shu’ayb said to his people: O my people, is my 
family more respectable and honoured to you than 
Allah, your Lord? Did you throw Allah behind you 
when you did not accept the prophet He sent to 
you? My Lord surrounds what you do. No action 
of yours is hidden from Him. He will repay your 
behaviour in the world with destruction, and in the 
Afterlife with punishment. 

<Sjj) O my people, do what you are able to in the 
manner you wish. I will also act in the manner I 
wish, as far as I can. Soon, you will come to know 
which of us is to receive a punishment of humilia¬ 
tion as justice, and who is lying in their claim. So 
wait for Allah’s decision and I will also wait with you. 

(j§j) When My command to destroy the people of Shu’ayb came, I rescued Shu’ayb and the people of faith with him 
through mercy from Me. Those of his people who did wrong were afflicted with the intense blast and they died. In the 
morning, they were found lying on the ground with their faces in the dust. 

It was as if they had never resided there previously. Without doubt, Madyan was distanced from Allah’s mercy when 
His punishment fell on them, just as Thamud was driven away from it by Allah’s sending down His anger on them. 

I had sent Moses with My signs that indicated My Oneness and with clear evidence that proved the truth of what he 
brought. 

@ I sent Moses to Pharaoh and the nobles from his people. These nobles followed Pharaoh’s command to them to disbe¬ 
lieve in Allah. The command of Pharaoh was not one that was right to be followed. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The verses condemn those ignorant people who do not understand the signs brought by the prophets. 

2. The verses condemn and declare foolish those who follow the instructions of people while ignoring Allah’s sacred law. 

3. The verses demonstrate the role of the family in supporting the call and the callers towards Allah. 

4. The idolaters are driven away from Allah’s mercy. 























J *J*ljy* 


[YTT; 




^1) 4^2-^ \ J*Jr*t5 4X-*^d Xj* S)J*-^3 0 k)Jy§ 

I SiiLC£ <£i3\ £$6e *M($) i^ &J \ 


0_?.i ^ j>~&j£>\(■ 

^ ($) ^^ ; JjGJ^PPbj^\jW?L)J^*' 

b^\^\% S\3$ Sh\0i^x$ 

v 9 ?'-»<’ ^ \'*\\ A# ^ 9 ** *> * 

<j^ LJ3 43 

«|j o\jJp5i$) ^ -k-*-* <J^r^^l jj Wj 



0 5i^J;lS W \ j£N^ 





<0 Pharaoh will go ahead of his people on the Day 
of Judgement until he enters them and himself into 
the fire of Hell. What a wretched place he will lead 
them to! 

<JS> Together with the destruction and drowning that 
afflicted them, Allah followed that with a curse and 
with their being driven away and distanced from 
His mercy in this world and on the Day of Judge¬ 
ment. What an evil thing happened to them in that 
they became the subject of two curses and punish¬ 
ment in the world and the Afterlife! 

I inform you, O Messenger, of the incidents of 


^ ^ ^ 1 ; WU ) ^ XYXVOOV-XXg^X, V/X U1V 1XXWVXWXIO vxx 

\s>X^aJ £(3^0^*^ jw the towns that have been mentioned in this surah. 

The landmarks of some of these towns still exist 
and the landmarks of others have been wiped out 
without any trace. 

|p I did not wrong them by afflicting them with 
destruction, but they wronged their own souls by 
bringing them to the point of destruction when they 
disbelieved in Allah. The Allahs they used to wor¬ 
ship besides Allah did not push back the punish¬ 
ment that came down on them when the command 
of your Lord, O Messenger, came for their destruc¬ 
tion. These Allahs of theirs only increased them in 
loss and destruction. 

|p Such is the grip and annihilation with which Al¬ 
lah seizes the towns that deny, in every time and 
place. His grip of such disobedient towns is a pain¬ 
ful and strong one. 

|p In Allah’s severe punishment of those disobedi¬ 
ent towns there is a lesson and warning for the one 
who fears the punishment of the Day of Judgement. 
Allah will gather people on that day to take them to 


account, and it will be witnessed by all people on the plains of the resurrection, 
jffj I only postpone that witnessed day for a time that is known. 

(jp When that day comes no soul will be able to present any argument or make any intercession, except after He gives 
permission. People on that day will be of two types: a miserable person who will enter the fire of Hell and a delighted 
person who will enter Paradise. 

fp Those who are wretched, because of their disbelief and corrupt actions, will enter the fire of Hell, in which their voices 
and their breath will be raised due to the severity of the blazing fire that they will suffer from. 

|p They will live in it eternally and will not come out of it for as long as the heavens and the earth last, except for those 
sinful monotheists whom Allah wills to remove from it. Your Lord, O Messenger, is the One Who does whatever He 
wishes and nothing can force Him to do something. 

|p Those who were made fortunate by Allah because of their faith and good actions will be in Paradise. They will live 
there eternally for as long as the heavens and the earth last, except for those sinful monotheists whom Allah wills to enter 
into the fire of Hell for a time. The delight that Allah will provide for the people of Paradise will never be cut off from 
them. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The verses warn against following the leaders of evil and corruption; and they explain the misfortune that results in 
both the worlds because of following them. 

2. Allah is innocent of being accused of injustice when He destroys those who associate partners with Him and commit 
sin. 

3. The Allahs of the idolaters will not be of any benefit on the Day of Judgement to those who worshipped them and they 
will not be able to save them from the punishment. 

4. People will be divided into two groups on the Day of Judgement: the fortunate who will live eternally in Paradise and 
the wretched who will live eternally in the Hellfire. 




















oL^Sl 1 l)J La J|4 j 

Iji^ (Jjl3 >—^jl4 c 

A^Sl 9 <^2ll^--s=d ^ / a*y> \jLLj\ g^ (^) 


Oj5^ 


^- 5 . 

OjLajoLaj > j VcS&jQ Lia3 ( ^ ) 

ctLa^a ^\j O^jOj-^ A^: 

1^-^ Oi$ ^ ($)Ja«^ 5^LLJo L^jAj^ j 

j4iLl^L^ J4 4J^ l)^- 5-L>a_^^L-^^ 

i$?j^====>5 <£&'$ oWl< 4\ o^LboiX--L^^\ oi<J^^ 



sjj^rt j>03 ^ O | 

£?\5 >4^Lxi^ <4 o^ 


@ So do not be, O Messenger, in doubt about the 
invalidity of what these idolaters worship. They 
have no proof based on logic or any proof from the 
sacred law to justify such worship. The only thing 
that makes them worship other than Allah is their 
blind following of their forefathers. He will give 
them their full portion of the punishment without 
any reduction. 

@) I had given Moses the Torah, but people differed 
with respect to it: some of them believed, while oth¬ 
ers did not. Had it not been for Allah’s prior decree 
that the punishment will not come quickly, but will 
be postponed until the Day of Judgement for a rea¬ 
son, the punishment they deserve would have come 
down on them in this world. The disbelieving Jews 
and idolaters are in doubt about the Qur’an, which 
creates uncertainty in them. 

@> Your Lord, O Messenger, will certainly give 
each group who disagreed a full repayment for their 
actions. Any good action will receive a good repay¬ 
ment and any evil action will receive an evil repay¬ 
ment. Allah is Aware of what they do. No action of 
theirs is hidden from Him. 

(@ So remain patient, O Messenger, as Allah has in¬ 
structed you. Fulfil His instructions and stay away 
from His prohibitions. Let those believers who 
have repented with you also remain patient. Do not 
overstep the limits by committing sins, because He 
sees what you do. No action of yours is hidden from 
Him and He will repay you for what you do. 

HI Do not incline to the disbelievers who do wrong 
by being kind to them or showing them love, or the 
fire of Hell will afflict you because of such incli¬ 
nation; and you will not have any friends besides Allah to save you from it. Then you will not find anyone to help you. 
@ Maintain, O Messenger, the prayer in the best manner at the two ends of the day: at the beginning and end of the day. 
Also, maintain the prayer during the hours of the night. Good actions wipe out minor sins. This is a warning for those 
who pay attention and a lesson for those who accept. 

|!| Be patient in doing what you have been instructed to do with respect to being upright and avoiding the things you 
have been prohibited from, such as transgression and leaning towards the wrongdoers. Allah will not cause the reward 
of those who do good to be wasted. Instead, He will accept from them the best of what they did and will give them their 
reward in accordance with their best actions. 

(|J| If only there were, among the communities who were punished before you, remnants of the people of virtue and piety 
who prohibited those communities from disbelief and from corruption on earth through sins. But there were no such 
remnants among them, except for a few of them who used to prohibit corruption and whom I saved when I destroyed 
their people who did wrong. The wrongdoers from their people pursued the luxuries they had and were wrong in doing so. 
HI Your Lord, O Messenger, would not destroy any town if its inhabitants were acting correctly on earth. He would only 
destroy it if the inhabitants were causing corruption by disbelief, disobedience and sins. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Allah’s decree has already been passed that the punishment in the world will be postponed until the Day of Judgement. 
This is for a reason intended by Allah. 

2. It is necessary to remain firm on Allah’s religion. 

3. The verses warn against leaning towards the disbelievers who do wrong, by being kind to them or showing them love. 

4. The verses explain the times of the five ritual prayers which are to be offered at the two ends of the day and during the 
early hours of the night. 

5. The verses explain Allah’s custom of having evil actions wiped out by good actions. 

6. It is encouraged to create a group consisting of people of virtue who instruct good and prohibit corruption and evil. 

7. Allah’s custom is that He does not destroy any town if its people are setting things right on earth. 










Hud 


234 


Part 12 

























0$i „ 

5 s& 0*2& 

^JriJri^'CLi^,A&iy*j (Jp-I 



pjiS&i 


,v-ri>> ,><-c» 



\S^3 ^ ^y =^' 

0^~ 0 0^u2_x> 

cl>^ oAl£c 3 ilC^) iykjz^ \ 
tc^ )'L*5 &\9 JUJl^ 


Part 12 


affairs. Your Lord is not unaware of what you do. Instead, He 
they did. 


(jj| If your Lord, O Messenger, willed to make peo¬ 
ple one nation on the truth, He would have done so; 
but He did not will that, so they continue to differ 
with respect to it because of their following their 
desires and doing wrong. 

fj| This is so except for those whom Allah showed 
mercy by giving them guidance. They do not differ 
with respect to His Oneness, may He be glorified. 
For this test of disagreement, He created them. 
Some of them are wretched and others fortunate. 
The word of your Lord, O Messenger, in which He 
decreed in pre-eternity to fill Hell with jinn and hu¬ 
mans who follow Satan, is final. 

Hi Every incident I relate to you, O Messenger, 
from the lives of the messengers before you is to 
make your heart firm on the truth and to strengthen 
it. In this surah, the truth, about which there is no 
doubt, has come to you. In it there has come to you 
a warning for the disbelievers and a reminder for 
the believers (who benefit from such a reminder). 
HJ Say, O Messenger, to those who do not have 
faith in Allah and do not accept His Oneness: Act 
according to your way of ignoring the truth and pre¬ 
venting others from it. We will also act according to 
our way of remaining firm on it, inviting towards it 
and being patient in it. 

© Wait to see what comes down on us. I am also 
waiting to see what comes down on you. 

|§J Allah alone has knowledge of the Ghaib in the 
heavens and the earth. Nothing is hidden from Him. 
The entire matter will be returned to Him alone on 
the Day of Judgement. So worship Him alone, O 
Messenger, and place your trust in Him in all your 
knows about it and He will repay each person for what 



Joseph (Surah Yusuf) 


® Themes of the Surah: 

This surah promises to strengthen the Prophet (peace be upon him) and the believers after undergoing their many trials. 

® Explanation: 

© Alif Lam Ra’- the placement of such letters has been discussed at the beginning of Surah Al-Baqarah. The verses that 
are revealed in this surah are from the verses of the Qur’an which are clear in their meaning. 

QJ I have revealed the Qur’an in the language of the Arabs, so that you, O Arabs, can understand its meanings. 

@ By revealing this Qur’an to you, I narrate, O Messenger, the best of stories, in their accuracy, the soundness of their 
words and their eloquence. Before I revealed it, you were unaware of these stories, without any knowledge of them. 

© I tell you, O Messenger, about the time when Joseph said to his father, Jacob, ‘O my father, I dreamt of eleven stars 
and I saw the sun and the moon. I saw all of them prostrating to me’. 

This dream was an early sign of good news for Joseph (peace be upon him). 

Beneficial Points: 

1. Unnecessary disagreement is condemned in Islam. 

2. The reason for Qur’anic stories is stated in these verses: to make the heart of the Prophet (peace be upon him) firm and 
to advise the believers. 

3. Knowledge of the unseen is exclusive to Allah and no one shares this with Him. 

4. The reason for the Qur’an being revealed in Arabic was for the Arabs to understand it and convey it to others. 

5. The Qur’an contains the best of stories. 




























<Mj>^ Cjt 

J4S <j-5 C^y3 

I ia 4_£ ^ _ j O ^Joai ^L> o[ 3 > ^ J ^ 

clo-\ \J) \S i \ 0 * 2 

J ^) ^ * jO* L y^-r^ (j^ 0^-9 ^ i 

^-4^5 ^ j^Jq 

4^3\ ji,i^SI 

\^ sl 3 ^S—^ ^ 

V^4J lw> f \ (fr) i 

(j\ L$i) ,2> ^ ( a\ / j^\j\j 


Cp Jacob said to his son, Joseph: O my son, do not 
mention your dream to your brothers because they 
will understand it and become jealous of you. They 
will then plot against you because of their envy. Sa¬ 
tan is a clear enemy to man’, 
jjj) Just as you have seen that dream, your Lord will 
choose you, O Joseph, and teach you the interpre¬ 
tation of dreams; and He will perfect His favour on 
you by giving you prophethood, as well as king¬ 
dom, just as He completed His blessing on your two 
forefathers before you, Abraham and Isaac, with 
the favours of this world and the Afterlife that He 
blessed them with. Your Lord is One Who knows 
His creation and Who is Wise in His planning. 

@ In the story of Joseph and his brothers there are 
lessons and advices for those who ask about the in¬ 
cident. 

@ At that time, the brothers said among them¬ 
selves: Joseph and his full brother are more beloved 
to our father than we are, whereas we are a group 
large in number. Why does he prefer them to us? 

We think that our father is mistaken in preferring 
them to us without any apparent reason. 

C§j) It was further said: Kill Joseph or expel him to 
a far-off land and your father’s attention will be all 
yours and he will love you completely. After killing 
him and expelling him, you can be righteous when 
you repent from your sin. 

@ One of the brothers said: Do not kill Yousuf, 
rather throw him into a well and some passers by 
may find him and take him, this is a lesser evil if 
you really want to get rid of him. 

@ When they agreed to get rid of him, they said to 
their father, Jacob: O our father, why do not you trust us with Joseph? We have compassion for him and we will take care 
of him against anything that might harm him. We want good for him, so we will protect and look after him until he comes 
back to you safely. So, what stops you from sending him with us? 

@ Let us take him with us tomorrow, so he can have a good time and play with us and we will protect him from any 
harm that may come to him. 

@ Jacob said to his sons: I am saddened by your taking him because I cannot bear to be away from him. I also fear that 
a wolf may eat him when you are not paying attention to him, absorbed in your enjoyment and play. 

@ They said to their father: If a wolf was to eat Joseph when there are so many of us, then, in such a case, we are good 
for nothing and we are losers because we could not save him from the wolf. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The occurrence of truth-revealing dreams is established by the sacred law and it is pennissible to interpret them. 

2. It is allowed in the sacred law to hide some facts if some harm may occur by revealing them. 

3. The verses explain the virtue of the children of the family of Abraham and that they were chosen over other people for 
prophethood. 

4. Favouring one child with more love creates hatred and envy amongst brothers and sisters. 






















I&L 




(3 <^o i lxA$ 

^5\ fr 

\ L^J iS ~4^ 4^===^ LaH^ 

^ JhjJlS^^^p Jo 


4 


YY > Vlrf l B!^f^ r^^^>M ^ jgf © So Jacob sent Joseph with his brothers. They 

took him a long distance and were determined to 
throw him to the bottom of a well. In this condition, 
I sent revelation to Joseph saying, ‘You will inform 
them of this act of theirs at a time when they will 
not realise that it is you’. 

@ The brothers of Joseph came to their father in 
the evening, pretending to cry in order for him to 
believe them. 

@ They said: O our father, we went off on foot 
racing with one another and shooting arrows and 
we left Joseph by our clothes and provisions to look 
after them. Then the wolf ate him. You are not go¬ 
ing to believe us, even though we are absolutely 
truthful in what we have told you. 

(Jj) They confirmed their story with a trick. They 
brought the shirt of Joseph stained with the blood of 
something else, giving the impression that it was a 
sign of the wolf’s having eaten him. Jacob realised 
that they were lying, because the shirt was not tom, 
and he said to them: The matter is not as you have 
said. Instead, your souls have made an evil action 
that you committed seem good to you. I will exer¬ 
cise beautiful patience without any complaint. Al¬ 
lah is the One from Whom aid is requested against 
what you mention about the matter of Joseph. 

@ A passing caravan came by and they sent some¬ 
one to draw water for them. He lowered his bucket 
into the well and Joseph caught hold of the rope. 
When the person who had lowered the bucket saw 
him, he happily said, ‘Good news! Here is a boy!’ 
The water-drawer and a few others hid him from 
the rest of the caravan, regarding him to be mer¬ 
chandise that they could trade. Allah knew what they were doing with Joseph when they treated him as an item of sale. 
No action of theirs was hidden from Him. 

@ The water-drawer and his companions sold him in Egypt for a petty amount of a few silver coins that could be eas¬ 
ily counted due to their small number. They sold him cheaply because they wanted to get rid of him quickly. They had 
realised from his condition that he was not a slave and they were afraid of his family. Allah was Merciful to him by not 
keeping him with them for very long. 

@ The man from Egypt who had purchased him said to his wife, ‘Be good to him and look after him well. He may benefit 
us by doing some of the things we need, or we may adopt him as a child’. 

Just as I saved Joseph from being killed, removed him from the well and made the heart of the minister soft towards him, 
I established him in Egypt, to teach him the interpretation of dreams. 

Allah is in full control of His affair, and His affair will come into effect. No one can compel Him, may He be glorified; 
but most people - who are actually disbelievers - do not know that. 

@ When Joseph reached the height of his spiritual and physical strength, I gave him understanding and knowledge. With 
a reward similar to what I gave him, I reward those who do good by following Me. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The verses explain the seriousness of envy, which caused the brothers of Joseph to plot against him and conspire to 
kill him. 

2. The sacred law allows acting on clues when trying to establish a legal case. 

3. In the story of Joseph (peace be upon him), despite all the odds Allah’s plan for him prevailed, and He gave Joseph 
authority and power and taught him the interpretation of dreams. 


3 {^) Cxi- ^===zj o j 

\ £■ I 


Yusuf 


237 


Part 12 















\t ■"> 

OJJ-" 


YTA 








@ The wife of the minister tried cunningly and by 
the use of a trick to get Joseph (peace be upon him) 
to commit an indecent act. She shut the doors to 
ensure that they were alone and she said to him, 

‘Come towards me!’ Joseph said: I seek protection 
in Allah from what you are calling me toward. My 
master has taken good care of me in my stay here 
and I will never betray him. If I betray him, I will 
be a wrongdoer; and those who do wrong do not 
succeed. 

@ She had desired to commit the indecent act and 
the same thought would have crossed his mind had 
he not seen Allah’s signs that prevented him and 
distanced him from that. I showed him My proofs 
to keep him pure from evil and distance him from 
unlawful sexual relations and betrayal. Joseph was 
one of My servants whom I chose for messenger- 
ship and prophethood. 

@ They raced for the door: Joseph to save himself, 
and she to prevent him from leaving. She caught 
hold of his shirt to stop him from leaving and she 
tore it from behind. At the door they found her hus¬ 
band. The minister’s wife deceptively said to him: 

The punishment for the person who intended to 
commit an indecent act with your wife, O minis¬ 
ter, can only be prison or that he be given a painful 
punishment. 

Joseph (peace be upon him) said: It was she who 
tried to get me to commit an indecent act. I did not 
intend it from her. 

Allah then made a child from her family speak in 
the cradle and it testified saying: If Joseph’s shirt 
is torn from the front, then it indicates that she is 
truthful, because she was trying to stop him from coming on to her; and then he will be lying. 

@ But if his shirt is tom from behind, then that is an indication that he is truthful, because she was trying to seduce him 
whilst he was running away; and she will be lying. 

When the minister saw that Joseph’s shirt was torn from behind, he realised that Joseph was telling the truth and he 
said: This accusation that you cast on him is part of your trickery, O women. Your trickery is certainly strong. 

@ He said to Joseph: O Joseph, completely ignore this and do not mention it to anyone. And you, woman, ask forgive¬ 
ness for your sin, for you committed a sin by trying to seduce Joseph. 

@ The news spread in the city and a group of women disapprovingly said: The wife of the minister is calling her slave 
towards herself. His love has penetrated her heart. We think she is clearly misguided in trying to seduce him and because 
of her love for him despite his being her slave. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. In certain instances, the schemes of women can be great. 

2. It is evil to betray someone who does good to you with respect to his family and wealth. This was what Joseph men¬ 
tioned as one of the reasons for his refusal to commit the indecent act. 

3. The verses show that prophets are innocent and that Allah has protected them from falling into evil and indecency. 

4. It is necessary to push away indecency and run away to rid oneself of it. 

5. The sacred law allows people to defend themselves against an unjust accusation. 

6. The sacred law can be established by using indications of fact. 


^ M3 

x \ ,y* 9 4 j>\ g-L ^ 

oils 

J {jA \jUa 0 'lyi, 

■" h2- 6- 

L \ vLij A li j -v? 


Yusuf 


238 


Part 12 
























c=Soi o ^ 

^ hs. ^** *" •"' 

^-X2A ^)\ ^,-Jyi^ JJfcV* ^ 

J Cf&^ ^J> 5 ^($)Oi^r^ ^ S ^-^^5 

^\s r c-zfe(£j) lj^ 

^ ^T **• ”^?Tt^\^l ^ ^ o< ^''» . , J? ">/J5 unu uivu lu ciuivc mm, uui nv^ i wiiiauivu pun. cinv. 

j ci j i \j\j\~* A-*> IAj a 3 {^)JLA*M HjS^ refused. If he does not, in the future, do what I de- 

^ ^ ^ y *%. ^ ^ h**- ^ ^ ^ V& oira V%^ ii m 11 rtA fn nt»ioAn n«/1 iifill Uaaaiv\a Ana r\' 

-Xs>~\ y^ ^-*-4 1 ' ' r ^T’j^ >m 

^yy ^ yyyy 

fit 

uSoiiS^ \ zjj \ jb jy > i*i? usoij^ ,_\ \s ( ^ i 
<^y ^x^j \^cy\j y yz& ^a^j\sj 


@ When the wife of the minister heard of their dis¬ 
approval of her and their gossip about her, she sent 
an invitation to them to come and see Joseph, so 
that they would excuse her. She prepared for them a 
place with cushions and pillows and she gave each 
one of the women who were invited a knife to cut 
food. She then said to Joseph (peace be upon him), 
‘Go out to them!’ When they saw him, they were 
taken aback by his beauty and stunned by his hand¬ 
someness. As a result, they cut their hands with the 
knives that were meant for cutting food and they 
said: Allah is free of faults! This boy is not human. 
The beauty he possesses is not found in human be¬ 
ings. He can only be one of the noble angels. 

(j§) The wife of the minister said to those women 
when she saw what happened to them, ‘This is the 
slave who you blamed me for loving. I desired him 
and tried to entice him, but he remained pure and 






Yusuf 


239 




Part 12 


sire, he will go to prison and will become one of 
those who are disgraced’. 

@ Joseph (peace be upon him) prayed to his Lord 
saying: O my Lord, prison, which they threaten me 
with, is preferable to me than the shameful act they 
call me towards. If You do not remove their scheme 
from me, I may incline to them and I will become 
one of the ignorant ones - if I give in to them and 
do what they want me to do. 

@ Allah answered his prayer and removed the 
scheme of the minister’s wife and that of the wom¬ 
en of the city from him. He, may He be glorified, 
heard the prayer of Joseph - He hears the prayer of 
any person who prays to Him. He knew the condi¬ 
tion of Joseph and He knows the condition of everyone besides him. 

@ Then the view of the minister and his people, after they had seen evidence of his innocence, was that they should put 
him in prison for an unknown period, so that the scandal was not exposed. 

@ They put him in prison and two youngsters entered the prison with him. One of these youngsters said to Joseph, ‘I 
saw in my dream that I was pressing grapes to make wine’. The other said: I saw that I was carrying bread on my head, 
from which birds were eating. Tell us, O Joseph, the interpretation of what we saw. We regard you to be from those who 
do good, so be good to us by interpreting our dreams. 

@ Joseph (peace be upon him) said: No food allocated to you by the king or anyone else will come you, except that I will 
explain to you its essence and form before it comes to you. The interpretation I give you is what my Lord has taught me. 
It is not soothsaying or astrology. I have left the religion of a people who do not have faith in Allah and who denounce 
the Afterlife, although they acknowledge it within themselves. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The verses show the beauty of Joseph (peace be upon him), which was the reason for the women becoming infatuated 
with him. 

2. Joseph (peace be upon him) gave preference to prison over going against Allah. 

3. The interpretation of dreams was one of the gifts that Allah gave Joseph (peace be upon him). 

















_____ £ f _____ ^ _ ____^ 

oI^==\~a 9 

_____ ^___ ^___ *'£'*’ '"' e -£ ^ ^ ^ 
^<S ~^-^/-^ tl3 133 

i _^cx^(3)oj^==i-^^ ^13^33^=3 c£9j 

JL45J V 4^-9 \ £33 o_^^ oljjf\ 3 if^-Z' 

Z\jZJ$i X $ [zAjjj iyt-~ljj Xlzz 130 1 

^^£33 J-fei^jfotej 
3J 

Ka£=> ScA\5>\ i^5vg.0 ^3g_j3gjg9 3 

3a& 3ji=\3 dlg$ 

£-£jS 3v\J-* 2 \ ^A-^3 j Cr5 

o\ U 4 r 4 - Zj^l 

^-r<2J £j£>tu**J \ (3 0 - 3 ^ —3 \ 

(J^Z==^cJ}Z^ Oj^Jb J\sj (^) | 

(^) 0^^_5o 


jg} Joseph said that he followed the path of his 
fathers, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob: the path of 
worshipping Allah alone. He said it was not right 
for them to associate anything with Allah, Who is 
alone in His Oneness. Enabling them to worship 
Allah alone and have the faith which he and his fa¬ 
thers had was from the grace of Allah upon them. 

It was also from the grace of Allah upon all people, 
since He sent the prophets to them with that mes¬ 
sage; yet most people are not thankful to Allah for 
His blessings, and instead ungratefully disbelieve 
in Him. 

{§} Joseph then addressed the two men in the pris¬ 
on, asking whether worshipping many Allahs was 
better or worshipping Allah, the One, Who has no 
partner, the Prevailing over all else, Who none can 
prevail over. 

@ Joseph told them that they only worshipped 
names besides Allah, which have not been desig¬ 
nated by Allah, but were what they and their an¬ 
cestors had called Allahs - yet they had no share 
in divinity. Allah had sent no proof showing that 
giving these names was correct. The command in 
all creation is Allah’s alone, and does not belong 
to these names, which they and their ancestors had 
come up with. Allah, glory be to Him, has instruct¬ 
ed that you worship Him alone, and has forbidden 
that you should associate others with Him. Wor¬ 
shipping Allah alone is the straight path, which has 
no deviation in it. Most people do not know this, 
and therefore they associate other things with Al¬ 
lah, worshipping some of what Allah has created. 

@ Joseph told his two companions in the prison 
that he would interpret their dreams for them. He told them that the one who dreamed that he was pressing grapes to make 
wine would get out of the prison, and return to his work, and would serve the king. As for the one who dreamed that he 
was carrying bread on his head that the birds were eating from, he would be killed and crucified, and the birds would eat 
from his head. The matter they asked for an opinion on was settled and would come to pass. It was an inevitable reality. 
@ Joseph asked the one he considered to be saved of the two, the wine bearer of the king, to mention his story and his 
situation to the king, so that he might release him from prison. Satan made the man forget to mention Joseph to the king, 
so he stayed in prison for several years after that. 

@ One day the king said that he had seen a dream in which seven fat cows were being eaten by seven thin ones, and 
seven green ears of com and seven dry ears of com. He asked the notables and nobles to tell him the interpretation of his 
dream, if they knew how to interpret dreams. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. People must follow the path of Abraham: withdrawing from associating partners with Allah and people who do this. 

2. People must worship Allah alone, because only He possesses the right to command. 

3. All the Allahs which are worshipped with Allah are only names for things that people have made-up without permis¬ 
sion from Allah, and which have no share in divinity. 

4. People must take advantage of every opportunity to call others to Allah, as Joseph (peace be upon him) did in prison. 


Yusuf 




Part 12 

















<S$ <J l3j 


I 


@ They said that his vision was a jumble of dreams, 
and because of this it could not be interpreted; and 
that they were not knowledgeable about the inter¬ 
pretation of mixed-up dreams. 

@ The wine bearer - who, of the two men who 
had been imprisoned, had been saved - then re¬ 
membered Joseph (peace be upon him) after some 
time and that he was able to interpret dreams, so he 
said that he would tell them the interpretation of the 
king’s vision after asking someone who knew how 
to interpret it. He asked to be sent by the king to 
Joseph so that he could interpret his dream. 

(jS) When the man who had been saved reached Jo¬ 
seph, he asked Joseph, the truthful, to inform them 
of the interpretation of someone dreaming about 
seven fat cows being eaten by seven thin cows, and 
seven green ears of com and seven dry ears of corn, 
so that he might return to the king and those with 
him and they might know the explanation of the 
king’s dream, and also know the virtue and rank 
of Joseph. 

@ Explaining this dream, Joseph said that they 
should plant really well for seven consecutive 
years. And what they harvested in each of these 
seven years, they should leave in the ears of corn so 
that it would not rot, except for a little which they 
needed to eat from the com. 

@ Then after these seven fertile years in which 
they successfully grew food, seven barren years 
would come, when the people would eat all they 
had harvested in the fertile years, except for a little 
of what they had stored, from which they would be 
able to sow seeds. 

{j) Then after these barren years a year would come in which the rains would fall, and the crops would grow, and the 
people would press those things that need pressing, such as grapes, olives and cane. 

@ The king told his servants, when Joseph’s explanation of his dream reached him, to release Joseph from prison and 
bring him to him. When the king’s messenger came to Joseph, he told him to return to his master, the king, and ask him 
about the story of the women who cut their hands, so that his innocence would be made clear before he left the prison. 
Joseph said that his Lord was aware of how they had tried to seduce him, as nothing is hidden from Him. 

@ The king, addressing the women, asked what happened when they called Joseph through trickery. Was it to commit 
immorality with them? The wife of the minister, confessing what she had done, said that now the truth had become clear, 
that she tried to seduce him, and he did not try to seduce her, and that he was truthful in claiming that he was innocent of 
what she had accused him of. 

@ The wife of the minister said that this disclosure was so that Joseph would know through her confession that it was she 
who had tried to seduce him and that he was truthful, and that she had not lied about him in his absence, as it had become 
clear to her from what had happened that Allah does not give success to those who lie and scheme. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Joseph had perfect knowledge of explaining dreams correctly. 

2. People should clear their name when wrongly accused of something, by using the facts to establish the truth. 

3. The merit of speaking the truth, even if it is against oneself, is highlighted in the confession of the minister’s wife. 

















Up The minister’s wife continued speaking, saying 
that she was not free of blame from having wanted 
to do something bad, and she was not trying to jus¬ 
tify herself, because the human self commands of¬ 
ten to evil. This is because of its inclination towards 
what it desires and the difficulty of holding back 
from it, except for those whom Allah shows mercy 
to, preventing their egos from commending them to 
evil. Allah is Forgiving and Compassionate towards 
those of His servants who repent to Him. 

@ When Joseph’s innocence and knowledge be¬ 
came evident, the king asked his servants to bring 
Joseph to him to serve him. So they brought Joseph 
to him, and when Joseph spoke to him, his knowl¬ 
edge and high intelligence became evident so the 
king said to him “from this day, you are someone of 
rank, status and trust”. 

Up Joseph asked the king to put him in charge of 
taking care of the storehouses of wealth and food 
in the land of Egypt, because he would be a trust¬ 
worthy guardian, with knowledge and insight about 
what he was taking care of. 

Uj5 Just as Allah proved Joseph’s innocence and re¬ 
leased him from prison, He also established him in 
Egypt, so that he could go and live in any place he 
wished. Allah gives from His mercy to whomever 
of His servants He wills in this world, and does not 
allow the reward of those who do good to be lost, 
giving it to them in full, and nothing less. 

I The reward of Allah, which He has prepared in 







* 1 \p\l 

($) l| j \ o) 6jy 

o\j\ \S {^) (J? 

>0 i \ lj j >l \ jIa 


^ i ne re warn oi /\nan, wnicn ne nas prepareu in ^ [S- 

the Afterlife, is certainly better than the reward of jgB 

ir_^.i_...i_i_• a ii„l _i -HfiSHi W&- 


Yusuf 


242 


Part 13 


this life for those who have faith in Allah and who 
were mindful of Him, following what He has or¬ 
dered and staying away from what He has prohibited. 

Up The brothers of Joseph came to Egypt with their merchandise, and came before Joseph. He recognised that they were 
his brothers; but they did not recognise that he was their brother, because of the length of time that had passed and because 
of how much he had changed, since he had been just a boy when they threw him in the well. 

Up When he had given them the supplies and provisions they came for, and after they had informed him that they had a 
brother on their father’s side who they had left with their father, Joseph asked them to bring their brother on their father’s 
side and he would give them more supplies. He asked them if they did not see that he gave full measure, not subtracting 
from it at all, and that he was the best of hosts. Up Joseph told them that if they did not bring the brother asked for, then 
it would be clear that they were not telling the truth in their claim that they had a brother on their father’s side. He told 
them that in that case he would not give them any measure of food, and they should not approach his country. @ His 
brothers replied to him, saying that they would ask for him from their father, and would work hard to bring him, doing 
what Joseph instructed them without fail. Up Joseph told his servants to return the merchandise of these people to them, 
so that they would realize on their return that they did not do trade with it, which would force them to return again with 
their brother, to prove their integrity to Joseph, and so that he would receive their merchandise from them. Up When they 
returned to their father, and told him about the generosity of Joseph to them, they also told their father that any further 
measure would be denied to them if they did not bring their brother with them. They asked him to send him with them, 
because if he did so they would be given provisions. They promised their father that they would take good care of him, 
bringing him back safely. 

® Beneficial Points: 1. The ego is an enemy to the believer, so you must watch it carefully, correcting its deviation. 2. 
Being humble and admitting disobedience and shortcomings when they occur are some of the most beautiful qualities of 
good conduct. 3. The story highlights the state of knowledge and trustworthiness that someone who is given a position 
serving the general good should have. 4. Allah the Exalted sends a great bounty and His abundant blessings in this world 
and the Afterlife upon those who do good and who are patient. 5. It is emphasised in the verses that the bounty of Allah 
in the Afterlife is much better and more lasting for the people of faith than the blessings of this world. 6. It is permissible 
for a man to ask for a position and to praise himself if there is a need, in order to do good and put things right. 



















Jai^j \5j^ 1 <-^ Ixi 

I JL3 ^Vi 

^<-z>~J i-J 




jp Their father asked them if he should trust them 
with him as he had trusted them with his full broth¬ 
er, Joseph. He had trusted them with Joseph and 
made them promise to take care of him, and they 
had not done what they promised, so he did not 
trust their promise to take care of his brother; but 
he trusted in Allah, for He is the best of guardians to 
whom He wills, and the most Merciful of the merci¬ 
ful to whom He wills. 

(jj| When they opened the bags containing the food 
which they had brought, they found what they had 
traded for it had been returned to them. They asked 
their father what more could they ask for from this 
king after such generosity. What they had traded for 
their food had been returned by the king as a favour 
from him to them. They told their father that they 
would get food for their family and protect their 
brother from what he feared might happen to him, 
and they would get an extra camel load because of 
him accompanying them - an extra camel load be¬ 
ing an easy matter for the king. 

(jp Their father told them he would not send their 
brother with them until they had sworn by Allah 
that they would bring him back, unless destruction 
overwhelmed them all and none of them remained, 
and they were unable to do anything about it or 
to return. When they had given their father a firm 
promise in Allah’s name, he said that Allah was a 
witness over what they said, and His witnessing 
was sufficient for them. 

(j§j) Also, their father advised them not to enter 
Egypt from one gate all together, but to enter from 
different gates. This would be safer in terms of 
someone harming all of them if someone wished to do so. He did not say this so as to be able to stop any harm that Allah 
willed for them, or to bring them any benefit which Allah did not will for them, because the decree is Allah’s alone, and 
the command is His alone. Their father said that he placed his trust in Him alone concerning everything in his life, and 
that those who trust should put their trust in Him alone concerning everything in their lives. 

@ So they journeyed with Joseph’s full brother. When they entered through different gates, as their father had instruct¬ 
ed them, it did not stop what Allah had decreed for them in any way. It was just Jacob’s concern for his sons which he 
showed, advising them, knowing that the decree is Allah’s alone. He knew what Allah had taught him in terms of faith in 
the divine decree and taking precautions, but most people do not know this. 

@ When the brothers of Joseph came before him, together with his full brother, he drew his full brother close to him and 
said to him privately that he was his brother Joseph, and that he should not feel sad about the reckless behaviour of his 
other brothers, hurting and resenting the two of them, and throwing Joseph in the well. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. People are instructed to take precaution and care against those who have betrayed someone - the believer is not stung 
from the same hole twice. 

2. One of the elements of taking precaution is obtaining a firm promise with an oath from someone. Also, it is permissible 
to take an oath when fearful about whether another person will keep trusts and promises. 

3. A person is allowed to ask someone to make a promise, except for conditions that would be beyond the power of the 
person making the promise. 

4. Taking appropriate measures includes taking precautions against things that bring about ruin. 


aj 


. \ ' 


Yusuf 


243 


Part 13 




















[^l_j0 

A^\jj ^ji U {^J^w-j^j^^jVj ]j _^Ajo ^W- ( jr4^ 

^ JJil 

| jlyyj^\J> V3 (^) o \s($) 

'^r \yy^y^>^^^) J|-Xj>j ^ 

„ ^ *0^*2 *t _ _ ^ __ "fr 'fr ^ 

-ti 0^\-^<wi-^ ^\i> tf-lcj 



fc>-> 


oYS \ c?p> j 




@ So when Joseph instructed his servants to load 
the camels of his brothers with food, he put the 
measuring bowl of the king, which the food was 
measured with for those who came to get provi¬ 
sions, into the bag of his full brother, without their 
knowledge, in order to have him stay with him. 

When they were to travel and return back to their 
family, a caller called after them, saying that they, 
with their camels loaded with provisions, were 
thieves. 

@ The brothers of Joseph, turning towards the 
person calling after them and his companions who 
were with him, asked what they were missing that 
made them accuse them of stealing. 

© The caller and his companions, who were with 
him, said to the brothers of Joseph that they were 
missing the bowl of the king which they measured 
with. Whoever produced the bowl of the king be¬ 
fore the inspection would get a reward, which 
would be a camel load, and the speaker guaranteed 
this to whoever did so. 

© The brothers of Joseph swore by Allah that 
those accusing them knew they were free of blame 
and innocent of this, as they could see from their 
situation, and that they had not come to the land of 
Egypt to cause corruption in it, and that they had 
never been thieves. 

© The caller and his companions asked what the 
punishment for theft among them was, in case they 
should be proved to be liars in their claim that they 
were innocent of the theft. 

© Joseph’s brothers said that the payment for any 
thief among them was that the person in whose bag 
the stolen item was found would become the slave of whoever he stole from. This punishment of being made into a slave 
is the way they punished thieves. 

© So they returned them to Joseph to inspect their bags. He started by inspecting the bags of his half-brothers before 
inspecting the bag of his full brother, to cover up what he was doing. Then he inspected the bag of his full brother, and 
took the bowl of the king out of it. 

As Allah planned things for Joseph by arranging to have the bowl put into the bag of his brother, He also arranged - for 
the benefit of Joseph - that his brothers would be given the punishment of their country, which was the enslavement of 
the thief. This would not have come to pass if it had been according to the punishment of the king for thieves, which was 
beating and fining. Allah is able to arrange matters in whatever way He wills. He raises the ranks of those of His servants 
whom He wills, as He raised the rank of Joseph. Above every possessor of knowledge is someone more knowledgeable 
than them, and above the knowledge of everyone is the knowledge of Allah, Who knows all things. 

© The brothers of Joseph said that if he had stolen it was not surprising, since a full brother of his had stolen before he 
had, meaning Joseph (peace be upon him). Joseph hid his hurt at what they said, thinking to himself that their envy and 
the bad actions they had committed were evil itself in this context, and Allah knew best the lies that came from them. 
© Joseph’s brothers told him that their father was old and elderly and loved their brother dearly. They asked him to take 
one of them instead of him, saying that they saw that he was a doer of good in his dealings with them and others, and they 
asked him to be generous with them by doing this. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. A trick which makes the truth apparent is permissible, as long as it does not harm others. 

2. It is permissible for someone who is searching for something, or who has lost something, to offer a reward, specifying 
its worth and description for whoever helps them to return it. 


IX-> jLL_c3 3j \^===v^-Zij^\ J\S^43 \jb 

(V*. \j) W 4j \^==l£ \j 


Yusuf 


244 


Part 13 

















| ou 

t o 




oL^t UAs (v?) 

<5^ ^ ^=vMii 



.bM'O 


a _j 


^4*9 UA^d\ ^J-^ L V^_3( y^ 
fjai\ J===A (Jo J\5( ^ LjjjJ^i \^1 q 



*^< . - ^ T\_^ ^X- < ;? ^ 

3 >4^0 >>^3 ^ 9cj2-^J »> 


@ Joseph asked for protection from Allah that 
they should wrong someone innocent with the sin 
of a wrongdoer. If they took someone other than 
the person in whose bag they found the bowl of the 
king, then they would be wrongdoers, because they 
would be punishing someone who was innocent 
and letting a criminal go free. 

(j| When they despaired of Joseph responding to 
their request, they went away from the people to 
consult with each other. Their oldest brother asked 
them if they remembered that their father had taken 
a firm promise in the name of Allah from them that 
they would return his son to him, unless they were 
completely overwhelmed by what they were unable 
to repel, and that before that they had failed with 
regards to Joseph, and had not kept their promise to 
their father concerning him. He said that he would 
not leave the land of Egypt until his father permit¬ 
ted him to return to him, or Allah decreed that he 
_ take his brother back. Allah is the Best of Judges, 

t judging with truth and justice. 

@ The oldest brother told them to return to their 
father and tell him that his son had stolen, and the 
minister of Egypt had taken him as a slave as a 
punishment for his theft, and that they only related 
to him what they knew from seeing the bowl pro¬ 
duced from his bag. They did not know that he stole 
things, and if they had known this they would not 
have made a promise to their father to return him. 
@ In order to confirm that they were telling the 
truth, the brothers told their father to ask the people 
of the town where they had been, and to ask the 
people of the caravan they had come with, and that 
these people would tell him the same thing as they had. They said they were telling the truth in what they told him about 
his son’s theft. 

@ Their father told them that the matter was not as they said with regards to him having stolen. Rather, their souls made 
deception in this attractive to them, as they had been deceptive about their brother Joseph before. He said my patience 
is of a beautiful type, which directs complaints to Allah alone. He said that perhaps Allah would return Joseph, his full 
brother and their oldest brother all together. He, glory be to Him, knew Jacob’s situation and was Wise in the way He 
arranged everything for him. 

@ He pulled away, turning from them, saying, ‘O my grief for Joseph!’ The blackness of his eyes had become white out 
of his great mourning for him, because he was filled with grief and sorrow, yet hiding his grief from the people. 

@ The brothers of Joseph said to the father, swearing by Allah, that he would not stop remembering Joseph and grieving 
over him until he became very ill or actually died. 

(Sj§j) Their father said to them that he only complained to Allah of the grief and sorrow that had occurred him, and that he 
knew of the kindness and generosity of Allah and His response to those who were in need, and His reward for those who 
suffered, which they did not know. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. It is not permissible to take an innocent person for the crime of someone else. Another person cannot take the place of 
the criminal. 

2. Patience that is of a beautiful type is one where complaints are directed to Allah alone. 

3. The believer should have absolute certainty that Allah will release him from his distress. 



»jo \yjcD 































£LL)s 

1 j 5 (- 4 j\a § 1 ^/® \ LjA-a\_jI^_JU 

ljaS X^S\ (Sj^z*$ 6i tL^c- ij ,jI^=lM 

^ S\ fr ^^jk4l^ 444^ 3 \s® j 
65 


A,. ^ 4^il— j 


\^5 




3 Oj*#4==^ 

4-^® I 




jg} Their father told them to go and find out news 
about Joseph and his brother, and not to despair of 
relief from Allah and His release of His servants. 

Without doubt, only disbelieving people despair of 
relief from Allah and His release of His servants, 
because they do not know the greatness of Allah’s 
power and His subtle favour upon His servants. 

(jjS) So they did as their father instructed, and went 
in search of Joseph and his brother. When they 
came before Joseph, they said they had experienced 
hardship and poverty and had brought inferior, 
cheap goods. They asked him to give them a suf¬ 
ficient measure, as he had given them before, and 
to be charitable to them by giving them more than 
this, or overlooking their poor merchandise, saying 
that Allah rewards those who are charitable with the 
best of rewards. 

(SfjS) When he heard their words he felt compassion 
towards them, and let them know who he was, ask¬ 
ing them if they knew what they did to Joseph and 
his full brother when they were ignorant of the con¬ 
sequences of what they did to them. 

{§} They were amazed, and asked whether he was 
in fact Joseph. Joseph said to them that he was in¬ 
deed Joseph, and that the person with him was his 
full brother. Allah had favoured them, saving them 
from their previous situation, raising them in rank. 

Whoever is Mindful, following what He instructs 
and staying away from what He has prohibited, and 
being patient with hardship, their actions are good, 
and Allah does not allow the reward of those who 
do good to be lost; rather, He keeps it in store for 
them. 

@ The brothers apologised to Joseph for their behaviour towards him, and they said that Allah had indeed preferred him 
over them through the attributes of perfection He had given to him, and that they had committed evil and disobedience 
in what they had done to him. 

Joseph accepted their apology, saying that there would be no blame on them requiring a punishment, nor any criticism, 
from that day. He asked that Allah forgive them, and He, glory be to Him, is the most Merciful of the merciful. 

@ Joseph gave them his shirt when they informed him of what had happened to his father’s eyesight, telling them to take 
his shirt and to lay it over the face of his father, and that it would return his sight to him. He also told them to bring their 
whole family to him. 

jgj And when the caravan left, departing from Egypt and leaving the inhabited area, Jacob, peace be upon him, said to his 
people and those with him where he lived, that he could smell the scent of Joseph, although they might say he was foolish 
and an old senile man who doesn’t know what he says. 

(jp The people with him swore by Allah that he was still lost in his previous imaginings concerning Joseph’s importance 
to him and the possibility of seeing him again. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. A person is to take all appropriate measures to achieve what is desired, trusting in Allah, and not despairing of His 
mercy. 

2. It shows good character when a wrongdoer apologises for their sins, confessing against themselves, and asks for for¬ 
giveness from those they have harmed. 

3. The one who asks for forgiveness from Allah is the one who truly apologises. 

4. A person should accept the apology of the wrongdoer and not seek revenge, especially when it is possible to do so, and 
not criticise someone for what happened in the past. 




Part 13 




















A 1$ (w) (^a±!U^\jS\s\ j l23igJcLil\ l^tjlir 

uis0^4i\ 

^^A^j>-^\ J\Sj a^jf\ 4 12SL^ * ^-Aj^ <^p 4>o 

-j <j$£J 3 \ Jp *-Li ol 

^o c^-^ ^ O^l^Tj-^ '^lp>. -^J 4^ 

0i^H4P“i lAC? %» embraced his father and mother, and told his broth- 

^—- ers and their family to enter Egypt safely, Allah 


Ifp So when the person bearing news came with 
what would delight Jacob, he lay Joseph’s shirt 
over his face, and he became able to see again. 
Then he asked his sons if he had not said to them 
that he knew about the kindness and grace of Allah 
in a way that they did not know. 

@ The sons apologised to their father Jacob (peace 
be upon him) for what they had done to Joseph and 
his brother, and they asked their father to ask Allah 
to forgive the sins they had committed in the past, 
saying that they had been sinners and wrongdoers 
in what they did to Joseph and his full brother. 

(jp Their father said to them that he would ask for 
forgiveness for them from his Lord. Truly, He is 
Forgiving of the sins of those of His servants who 
repent to Him, and is Compassionate with them. 
@ Jacob and his family left their land to travel to 
Joseph in Egypt. When they came before him he 


V ‘ S 

rn 1 * 


£\iv 


Jl> 

hit ' ($) 

\p?\ 

~YQsuf P ^^^ ^~247~P ^^^S| | Part 13 


willing, not experiencing any harni there. 

|§| He sat his parents on the throne where he sat, 
and his parents and eleven brothers honoured him 
by prostrating to him, which was allowed in their 
sacred laws. Joseph (peace be upon him) said to his 
father that this honouring of him by their prostrat¬ 
ing to him was the explanation of the dream which 
he had had before, and which he had told his father. 
His Lord had made it a reality through this happen¬ 
ing. Joseph said his Lord had been kind to him by 
bringing him out of prison, and bringing them all to 
him from the desert after Satan had ruined things 
between him and his brothers; and that His Lord 
was subtle in planning what He wills to occur, Knowing the situations of His servants, Wise in His planning. 

@) Then Joseph called upon his Lord, saying that He had given him power in Egypt and had taught him the interpretation 
of dreams; and that He is the Creator of the heavens and the earth, originating them when there was nothing like them, 
the Protector of all his affairs in the life of this world and the Protector of all of them in the Afterlife. Joseph asked Him 
to take his soul at the end of his life whilst being in a state of submission to Allah, and to join him with the righteous 
prophets from his fathers and others in the highest level of Paradise. 

HI Allah revealed all that has been mentioned from the story of Joseph and his brothers to the Messenger (peace be 
upon him). He had no knowledge of it beforehand, since he was not there with the brothers of Joseph when they agreed 
to throw him into the bottom of a well, and when they planned their trick; but Allah revealed this all to the Messenger 
(peace be upon him). 

@) Most people will not have faith, even if the Messenger should make every effort for them to believe; so he should not 
lose himself in grief over them. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. It is desirable to give good news, because it brings joy to the heart of the Muslim. 

2. Devotion to parents, by respecting and honouring them, is a duty. 

3. The explanation of a dream may take place many years after it was dreamt. 

4. People are warned against the whisperings of Satan and whoever tries to create a division between those who are close 
to each other. 

5. No matter how well someone may be raised in their spiritual or worldly life, their success all goes back to the grace 
and blessings of Allah upon them. 

6. A person is to ask Allah for a good end, safety and success on the Day of Judgement and to join the company of the 
righteous in Paradise. 


















@) If they used their reason they would believe the 
Messenger (peace be upon him), because he did 
not ask any reward for the Qur’an or for what he 
called them to. The Qur’an is only a reminder for 
all people. 

(jf| The signs showing that there is only one Allah, 
glory be to Him, are many, spread out through the 
heavens and the earth. The disbelievers pass by 
them, turning away from thinking about them and 
considering them, not paying attention to them. 

HI Most people do not admit Allah as the Creator 
and Provider, Who brings to life and causes death, 
without also worshipping images and idols next 
to Him, or claiming that He has a son, glory be to 
Him! 

(jH Do the idolaters feel safe from a punishment in 
this world enveloping and overwhelming them, so 
that they cannot repel it; or from the Hour coming 
to them suddenly, when they are unaware so that 
they might prepare for it? Is it because of this that 
they do not believe? 

HI Allah tells the Messenger (peace be upon him) 
to say to those he calls to the truth that this is his 
way which he calls people to, with insight, as do 
those who follow him, guided by his guidance and 
following the Sunnah; and that he is not of those 
who associate partners with Allah, but worships Al¬ 
lah alone, glory be to Him! 

HI Allah only sent men, not angels, before the Mes¬ 
senger (peace be upon him), whom He gave reve¬ 
lation as He does to the Messenger, and they were 
from the people of the towns and not the desert. 

Their peoples denied them and Allah destroyed 
them. Do those who deny the Messenger not travel through the earth and think about what the end was of those who de¬ 
nied the truth before them, learning from their example? The bliss in the home of the Afterlife is better for those who are 
Mindful in this world. Do they not realise that is better, and so become mindful of Allah by following what He instructs 
(with faith being the most important instruction) and staying away from what He has prohibited (with not associating 
others with Allah being the most important prohibition)? |§| Allah gave time to the enemies of these messengers He 
sent, not being quick to punish, but luring them gradually until when their destruction was overdue, and the messengers 
despaired of it and the disbelievers thought that their messengers had lied to them in their promises of a punishment for 
those who deny the truth and the rescue of those who have faith; then Allah’s help came to His messengers, saving the 
messengers and believers from the destruction which the disbelievers suffered, and Allah’s punishment cannot be turned 
away from the sinners when He sends it down. In the stories of the messengers and their peoples, as in the story of 
Joseph and his brothers, are lessons to be learnt by those of sound mind. The Qur’an, which contains such narrations, is 
not words which are made up and fabricated about Allah, but a confirmation of the divine scriptures revealed from Allah 
and a detailed explanation of everything that needs explaining through sacred laws; and guidance to all that is good, and 
a mercy for those who have faith in it, because it is they who benefit from what is in it. 

Beneficial Points: 

1. It is not for a person, no matter how high his station is, to know the Ghaib of his own accord, as that is something that 
Allah makes particular to Himself. 2. From Allah’s grace, He gives His prophets some knowledge of things in the Ghaib 
for particular ends and wisdom. 3. The caller to truth is not able to change people’s hearts or to bring them to devotion, 
and most of the creation are not from the people of guidance. 4. Criticism of those who turn away from the signs of Al¬ 
lah in creation and proofs spread throughout the universe that there is only one Allah. 5. Verse 108 contains some of the 
pillars of calling people to the truth: the existence of a path; calling to Allah being based on knowledge, with insight; and 
there being people who are called to it. 6. That the prophets and messengers were human and male, rather than female. 
7. One way of convincing people when calling to the truth is for them to reflect on what happened to those in the past, 
and leam from their stories, which the noble Qur’an mentions. 8. The stories in the Qur’an are pure truth, not mixed with 
the impurities of fabrication or compilation, and the lies of the falsifiers do not enter into it. 


•<> > 


Y i A 






\ j*-* *W* J 

iLiiSll J^\£====> 


Yusuf 


248 


Part 13 
















The Thunder (Surah Ar-Ra’d) 



« u> 




Themes of the Surah: 

An explanation of the reality and manifestations 
of divine might and power, the establishment of 
promise and threat and Allah’s way with respect to 
change and alteration. 

I* ^Explanation: 

© We have spoken about similar phrases at the be¬ 
ginning of Surah Al-Baqarah. These sublime vers¬ 
es in this Surah, and the Qur’an that Allah has re¬ 
vealed to you - O Messenger - is the truth in which 
there is no uncertainty. There is no doubt that it is 
from Allah, but most people do not believe in it due 
to stubbornness and pride. 

{J} Allah is the One Who made the heavens high 
without any supports that you can see. Then He es¬ 
tablished Himself on the Throne and He subjugated 
the sun and the moon for the benefit of His creation. 
Both the sun and the moon run along for a speci¬ 
fied period of time that is known only to Allah. He, 
may He be glorified, disposes of all matters in the 
heavens and the earth as He wills. He explains the 
signs that indicate His Power in the hope that you 
may be certain about meeting your Lord on the Day 
of Judgement and prepare for it by doing good ac¬ 
tions. 

© He, may He be glorified, is the One Who spread 
out the earth and created on it firm mountains so 
that it does not cause the people to become unset¬ 
tled. From all types of fruit He made two kinds, like 
the male and female in animals. He draws the veil 
of night over the day so that it becomes dark after 
being bright. In that which is mentioned, there are signs and proof for a people who reflect and ponder over Allah’s cre¬ 
ation, for they are the ones who benefit from such signs and proof. 

© On Earth there are neighbouring plots, gardens of vineyards, crops, palm trees sharing one root and others with indi¬ 
vidual roots. All of these gardens and crops are watered with the same water, I make some of them better than others in 
taste and other benefits despite their being next to one another and being watered with the same water, there are signs and 
proof for those who reason, for they are the ones who pay heed to it. 

© If you are amazed, O Messenger, at anything, then you should surely be amazed at their denial of resurrection and 
their statement of proof for their denial: What, when we die and become dust and decayed and decomposed bones, shall 
we be resurrected and restored to life? Those who reject the resurrection after death are the ones who disbelieved in their 
Lord and as a result they disbelieved in His Power to resurrect the dead. They are the ones around whose necks chains of 
fire will be placed on the Day of Judgement. They will be the inhabitants of the Fire and they will remain there forever, 
without ever ceasing to exist and without their punishment coming to an end. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Allah is Almighty may He be glorified. How wondrous is the creation of the heavens, without any pillars that support 
them despite their huge and vast form. 

2. Allah is most Powerful and perfect in His lordship. He causes huge plants to grow out of small seeds, and despite 
nourishing them with the same water and sunlight, the fruits and crops vary in size, colours and taste. 

3. Allah’s extraction of huge trees from small seeds, after their being non-existent, contains a refutation of the idolaters 
who disbelieved in the resurrection. To re-assemble the parts of human remains that are scattered and decomposed into 
the earth and to once again resurrect them after they had once been in existence, is easier than extracting something 
non-existent from a seed. 


»\"> " A » - » $" ' » ' s' ' 


































sfc%4p ^i^\; aiS J> 

^|| Hs^ j^===== > ( Jw^^UjIjo 4jW {^} A-& 

^|| ^ ^ JJLo j ^ Xj5 Jh^^j 3\ ^5 

3 J^li V5 

<L>Jy^j jii ly*j Sp& )j^\ 

II 

Ujj^i>£>H*^ >\j\V\\ft^ g ^ 

^3^" ( -^5^ ($) <31? ^ cj<j*^ 


Cp The idolaters ask you, O Messenger, to bring 
on the punishment and they enquire as to why it is 
taking so long to come on them before they com¬ 
pletely enjoy the favours that Allah has decreed for 
them. Many such punishments have come before 
on people like them from the nations who disbe¬ 
lieved. Why do they not take a lesson from them? 

Your Lord, O Messenger, is one who pardons peo¬ 
ple despite their wrongdoing. He, therefore, does 
not rush to take retribution from them giving them 
a chance to repent to Allah. He is truly severe in 
punishing those who persist in their denial if they 
do not repent. 

@> Those who disbelieved in Allah - persisting in 
their rejection and obstinance - say: Why has no 
sign been sent down to Muhammad from his Lord, 
just as was sent down to Moses and Jesus? You, O 
Messenger, are only a warner who warns people of 
Allah’s punishment. You only have signs that Allah 
has given you. Every community has a prophet who 
shows them and guides them to the path of truth. 

(JS) Allah knows what every female bears in her 
womb. He knows everything about it. He knows 
about any shrinking, swelling, health or illness that 
occurs in the womb. By Him, may He be glorified, 
everything is determined with a measure that will 
neither decrease nor increase. 

© This is because He, may He be glorified, knows 
about everything that is not perceived by His crea¬ 
tion as well as everything that is perceived by them. 

He is the Majestic in His attributes, names and ac¬ 
tions. The Supreme over every creation of His in 
His self and attributes. 

@ He knows what is secret and what is even more hidden. Whether you, O people, hide your statements or proclaim 
them, it is the same in His knowledge. A person who hides from the eyes of people under the darkness of the night and 
the one who acts openly in the light of day, are equally known by Him. 

@ He, may He be glorified, has angels that come upon a person one after the other. Some of them come at night and some 
during the day. They protect the person by Allah’s command and they record his statements and actions. Allah does not 
change the good condition of a people for the worse unless they change the state of gratitude within themselves. When 
Allah, may He be glorified, wills destruction for a people, then no one can ward off what He wills. You, O people, do not 
have any one apart from Him who will take charge of your affairs and to whom you can resort to ward off the calamity 
that afflicts you. 

@ It is He who shows you, O people, the lightning, inspiring in you both fear of the lightning bolts and hope of rain. It 
is He who forms the clouds laden with rain water. 

@ The thunder pronounces His glory together with His praises, may He be glorified. The angels pronounce the glory of 
their Lord in awe of Him and out of respect and honour for Him. He sends thunderbolts to strike and eliminate whichever 
of His creation He wills. Yet the disbelievers still dispute about Allah’s Oneness. Allah is mighty in power and strength 
and severe in punishing those who go against Him. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Allah’s immense forgiveness and tolerance of the wrongs of the children of Adam. They arrogantly challenge His 
messengers and prophets but despite that He provides for them, keeps them safe and overlooks their faults. 2. The vast¬ 
ness of Allah’s knowledge of what it is in the darkness of the womb. He knows about the drop of sperm that comes into 
the womb, its then being formed into a male or female, its health and sickness, its sustenance and term and whether it 
is wretched or fortunate. His knowledge of it is full and comprehensive. 3. Allah’s great care for the children of Adam 
and the presence of angels who guard and protect them such as the recording angels. 4. Allah changes the condition of a 
person for the better when He sees him adopting the means of guidance. Being blessed lies in following the guidance of 
Allah’s words. 5. Proof that thunder glorifies Allah, most High, may He be glorified. 





Ar-Ra’d 


250 


Part 13 




















&sYfyS^J£j^^ j^-^H 

<"1 J 4^11/) ^3 j^L- 4 5J jiyjl^j 

*® il54-4^ i#\^ jySJLt ^ 4 ^%^ 


^ < 4j/^ 3 i' 


jiQ\g;ii\35j 


@ The call of monotheism is for Allah alone and 
no one shares this with Him. The idols on whom the 
idolaters call besides Him do not respond to the call 
of those who call them in any matter. Their calling 
them is simply like a thirsty person stretching his 
hand towards water for it to reach his mouth so that 
he can drink from it. The water is not going to reach 
his mouth. The call of the disbelievers to their idols 
is only in vain and far from being right, because 
they have no power to draw any benefit for them 
nor ward off any harm from them. 

@ All that are in the heavens and on earth submit 
themselves in prostration to Allah alone. A believ¬ 
er and disbeliever are equal in this, except that a 
believer submits and prostrates to Him willingly, 
while a disbeliever unwillingly submits even though 
his natural disposition dictates that he should do so 
willingly. The shadow of every creation that has a 
shadow submits to Him at the beginning and at the 
end of the day. 

@ Say, O Messenger, to the disbelievers who wor¬ 
ship others together with Allah: Who is the crea¬ 
tor and the controller of the heavens and the earth? 
Say, O Messenger, It is Allah who is their Creator 
and Controller and you acknowledge this. Say, O 
Messenger, to them: Have you taken for yourselves 
protectors other than Allah who are themselves 
helpless! They cannot draw any benefit for them¬ 
selves nor remove any harm. How then will they be 
able to do so for others? Say to them, O Messenger, 
Is the disbeliever, who has no insight, equal to the 
believer who can see and who is guided? And is 
disbelief, which is layers of darkness, equal to faith, 
which is light? Have they assigned in the creation partners to Allah, may He be glorified, who have created anything like 
Allah’s creation so that their creation is indistinguishable from His? Say to them, O Messenger, Allah alone is the Creator 
of all things. He has no partner in creation. He is the One and Only deity, who solely deserves to be worshipped, and He 
is the All Compelling. 

@ Allah strikes an example of the erosion of falsehood and the survival of truth with rainwater that comes down from 
the sky and causes riverbeds to flow, each according to its size, whether big or small. The overflowing water carries on its 
surface scum and froth that rise above the water. He then gives another example of falsehood and truth with some of the 
metals that people put into a furnace in order to melt down and to make ornaments for people. Falsehood is like the scum 
and froth that floats above the water and like the slag expelled by smelting the metal. Truth is like the pure water that can 
be drunk and that causes fruits, grass and vegetation to grow; and like the metal that remains after smelting, which is of 
benefit to people. Just as Allah has given these two examples, He gives many examples to people so that truth may be 
distinguished from falsehood. 

@ Those believers who responded to their Lord when he called them towards His Oneness and obedience will have the 
best reward, which is Paradise. But those disbelievers who did not respond to His call towards His Oneness and obe¬ 
dience, even if they possessed all the different types of wealth on earth, and twice as much, they would offer all of that 
to redeem themselves from the punishment. Those who did not respond to His call will be taken to account for all their 
wrong deeds and the home in which they will reside will be Hell— What a miserable place the Fire is to rest and settle in! 
® Beneficial Points: 

1. Description of the deviation of the idolaters in their calling on other than Allah for assistance. Resemblance of their 
condition to that of a person who wants to drink but stretches his hands towards the water without getting any. He cannot 
drink in this manner, as he did not adopt the proper means for doing so. 2. One of the methods of explanation used in 
the Qur’an is: Proverbs, which is to liken something abstract to something tangible and to give a mental image that helps 
one understand the meaning. 3. All things in existence submit and prostrate to Allah, willingly or unwillingly, because 
submission to Him, may He be glorified, is something dictated by natural disposition. 























@ The one who knows that what Allah has revealed 
to you, O Messenger, is undoubtedly the Truth from 
your Lord, and who has faith in and responds to 
Allah, cannot be equal to someone who is blind, 
who disbelieves in Allah and does not respond to 
Him. Only those with sound understanding will pay 
heed to and take a lesson from this. <Sjj) Those who 
respond to Allah are the ones who fulfil the pledges 
they made to Allah or the pledges they made to His 
servants and who do not break the pledges made 
with Allah or with others. |Jj) They are those who 
join everything that Allah commands to be joined, 
such as ties with family and their fellow brothers 
for the sake of Allah, who are in such awe of their 
Lord that it moves them to carry out His instruc¬ 
tions and refrain from His prohibitions, and who 
fear that Allah will take them to account for every 
sin they commit, for any person whose account is 
scrutinised will be ruined. They are those who 
remained steadfast in following Allah and in the 
ease and hardship that Allah decreed for them, and 
they remained firm in refraining from going against 
Him, seeking Allah’s pleasure. They kept up the 
prayer perfectly, they discharged their obligations 
from the wealth that We gave them, and they will¬ 
ingly gave from that wealth, secretly to avoid osten¬ 
tation, and openly so that others could follow their 
lead. They repel the evil of those who harm them by 
doing good to them. These people who have these 




TOY 




qualities will have a ] 
Day of Judgement, (j 


> 4 i; Op-? | 

CJ*J 

0 IE 

gp^ Z-43j» 

j^Ap Oi ^ 


Ar-Ra’d 


252 


Part 13 


praiseworthy outcome on the 
p This praiseworthy outcome 
refers to gardens in which they will permanently 
reside in luxury. To complete the favour, those of ^ 
their fathers, mothers, wives and children who were 
upright will enter these gardens together with them 
so as to make their stay even more enjoyable by meeting them. In addition, the angels will come in to visit and con¬ 
gratulate them from every door of their homes in Paradise. (SjS> The angels will greet them whenever they come to visit 
them saying: Peace be on you, i.e.: You are safe from calamities because of your being steadfast in following Allah and 
in difficult times and being firm in not going against Him. What a wonderful final home is your outcome! Since Allah 
mentioned the attributes of the believers, he thereafter mentioned the attributes of the disbelievers who turn away and 
said: @ As for those who break their pledge with Allah after it has been made binding, and cut off the relationships 
that Allah has commanded to be joined, those are the unfortunate and wretched ones who will be distanced from Allah’s 
mercy, and they will have a dreadful home in the Fire, {jp Allah expands provision for anyone He wills and restricts it for 
any of His servants that He wills. Being given abundant provision is not a sign of being fortunate or of having attained 
Allah’s love. Similarly, restriction of provision is not a sign of being wretched. The disbelievers rejoiced in the life of 
this world and inclined to it becoming comfortable therein. Yet the life of this world, compared to the Hearafter, is only a 
brief enjoyment that will soon pass. Those who disbelieved in Allah and His verses say: If only a physical sign was 
sent down to Muhammad from his Lord proving his truthfulness and then we will believe. Say, O Messenger, to those 
who suggest this: Allah, through His justice, leaves whoever He will to stray, and through His grace He guides to Himself 
those who turn towards Him in repentance. Guidance is not in their hands so that they could link it to the sending down of 
signs, (jp These people whom Allah guides are those who have faith and whose hearts find comfort in the remembrance 
of Allah and in His glorification and praise and by reciting and listening to His book. Truly it is only natural that in the 
remembrance of Allah hearts find comfort. 

® Beneficial Points: 1. Knowledge is virtuous and those who possess it are not equal to those who do not. 2. Encour¬ 
agement towards a number of moral virtues that lead to Paradise, including: good relations, awe of Allah, fulfilment of 
pledges, patience, spending and repaying an evil deed with a good one. 3. Warning against some attributes that result in 
being cursed and distanced from Allah’s mercy, including: breaking Allah’s pledge, cutting off what Allah has ordered 
to be joined and spreading corruption on earth. 4. The keys to provisions are in Allah’s hands, may He be glorified. The 
expansion or restriction by Allah in the provision of a servant should not necessarily be a cause of joy or sorrow as it is not 
an indication of Allah’s pleasure or anger in respect of that servant. 5. Guidance is not necessarily linked to the sending 
down of the signs and miracles requested by the idolaters. 6. One of the effects of the Qur’an on the believing servant is 
that it brings about tranquility in the heart. 


















Ijmmi 


^0%0 V 1^ 4l3 ill=9 &$ 0 & 
%p\ &M=S pti ' i\$ ^o^ 

^3 0\ yjS ^ \!k~?/pj \pp 

-t? *r 



}jyo^p\ opyljp^pP iSp) ‘oS 
Pp. ijp~j*-£jfa ijpis$p^j\ '^pppc^p 
Ppj&y&jS -PjQipP PpP 4 jji\ o!^ 


A>l 


;i? * 




: >j\|^fi> l j^- S ^ Q I—jIaC; 




jgS) These people who have faith in Allah and do 
good actions that bring them close to Allah, will 
have a pleasant life in the afterlife and will have a 
beautiful outcome in Paradise. 

(j|) Just as we sent previous messengers to their 
communities, We sent you, O Messenger, to your 
community so that you may recite to them the 
Qur’an that We revealed to you, for it is sufficient 
evidence of your truthfulness. Yet the condition of 
your people is that they reject this miracle because 
they deny the Benevolent One as they associate 
others with Him as partners. Say, O Messenger, 

: The Benevolent One, with whom you associate 
others as partners, He is my Lord; there is no one 
deserving of being worshipped but He; in Him I put 
my trust for all my affairs, and to Him I turn in re¬ 
pentance. 

@ If any of the divine scriptures had the quality of 
being able to make the mountains move from their 
places or the earth split and turn into rivers and 
springs, or be recited to the dead who would then 
come to life, it would have been this Qur’an that is 
revealed to you, O Messenger, for its evidence is 
clear and its effect is profound, if only their hearts 
were mindful - but they reject it. Instead, the matter 
of sending down miracles and other matters are en¬ 
tirely in Allah’s control. Do those who have faith in 
Allah not know that if Allah willed to guide all the 
people together without sending down any miracles 
He would have done so? But He did not will that. 
Those who reject Allah continue to be struck with 
a severe disaster that shakes them, or such disaster 
falls close to their homes until Allah’s promise of 
the continuous punishment comes to pass. Allah does not fail to accomplish what He promised when the time specified 
for it comes. 

@ You are not the first messenger to be rejected and mocked at by his people. The communities before you, O Messen¬ 
ger, mocked at their messengers and rejected them. But I gave respite to those who rejected their messengers until they 
thought I would not destroy them. Then I seized them after that respite, with various forms of punishment. What do you 
think of My punishment of them? It was really a severe punishment! 

@ Is the One who watches over the actions of every soul and who recompenses it for its actions more deserving of being 
worshipped, or these idols who do not have any right to be worshipped? Yet the disbelievers have unjustly and falsely 
made them partners to Allah. Say to them, O Messenger, : Tell us the names of the partners that you worship together 
with Allah if you are true in your claim. Or is it that you are informing Allah of partners on earth that He does not know 
of? Or are you informing Him with a show of words that have no reality? Rather, Satan has made the evil designs of the 
disbelievers seem good to them. Thus they rejected Allah and He turned them away from the path of righteousness and 
guidance. 

@ There is a punishment for them in this world in the form of being killed and imprisoned at the hands of the believers, 
but the punishment of the Hereafter that awaits them will be more severe and more difficult than the punishment of this 
world because of its never-ending severity and continuity. They will have no one to protect them from Allah’s punishment 
on the Day of Judgement. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The main purpose of every revealed scripture is to provide guidance and not to bring down signs and miracles. These 
are in the control of Allah who decrees them when and how He wills. 

2. Allah consoles the Prophet (peace be upon him) and informs him that the denial that he is experiencing with the idol¬ 
aters is not something new, but was faced by the previous prophets. 


Clip. JSai 

($i P cPSS Uj pS \ pxppjj ^ 


Ar-Ra’d 


253 


Part 13 




















jy&tf Ipj j'ili'c^ * 

^^-^31>^_3^ od^ j \~t^====>\ 

•£s \jaSij\«- 


ks^» 


r ^ 

OjP^H 


lij ^ js j (j^ ^ Cj^J <0) ^J>> ^ I^j 

•AjS^sJ^ cJtlp^ 0J di^SSj{^) 

jlsJ 1 * 1 ^ 31 ^ oii^lfel 

0 J^Q. 0 O il-0 ^ ^\i0\j o^ <J0j) 



Ijp The description of Paradise that those mindful 
of Allah, by fulfilling His instructions and avoiding 
His prohibitions, have been promised is that rivers 
flow below its palaces, its fruits are perpetual and 
do not ever end unlike the fruit of the world, and 
its shade is everlasting without ever retracting. That 
is the outcome that awaits those who are mindful 
of Allah, by fulfilling His instructions and avoiding 
His prohibitions. The outcome of the disbelievers 
is the Fire, which they will enter to remain there 
forever. 

@ Those Jews to whom We gave the Torah and 
those Christians to whom We gave the Gospel, 
rejoice in what has been revealed to you, O Mes¬ 
senger, because it conforms to some of what was 
revealed to them. Some factions of the Jews and 
Christians deny parts of what has been revealed to 
you because it does not conform to their desires, 
or it describes them as having altered or distorted 
their religion. Say to them, O Messenger, Allah has 
only instructed me to worship Him alone, and not to 
associate any partners with Him. To Him alone I in¬ 
vite and not to anyone else. To Him alone is my re¬ 
turn. This is what the Torah and the Gospel taught. 

@ Just as We sent down the previous scriptures in 
the language of their people, We have sent down to 
you, O Messenger, the Qur’an as a decisive word 
indicating the truth in the Arabic language. If you, 

O Messenger, follow the desires of the People of 
the Scripture, in their request to you to delete what 
does not conform to their desires, after you have 
received the knowledge that Allah has taught you, 
then you will not have anyone to take charge of 
your affairs and to assist you against your enemies and you will not have anyone to protect you from Allah’s punishment. 
(Sjj) We sent messengers before you, O Messenger, who were human - so you are nothing new among the messengers. 
We gave them wives and children like other human beings. We did not make them angels who do not marry and have 
children. You are one of these messengers who marry and have children. Why then are these idolaters surprised at this? 
No messenger can bring a miracle except if Allah gives permission for him to do so. For every matter decreed by Allah 
there is a Book in which it is mentioned and a time which will neither come too early nor too late. 

Allah removes whatever good, evil, fortune or misfortune He wills to remove and He confirms whatever He wills. 
With Him is the Preserved Tablet, which is the source of all of that, and any erasure or confirmation that appears conforms 
to what is in it. 

(Sj| If I show you, O Prophet, some of the punishment that We promise them before your death, then that is My choice. If 
I cause you to die before showing you that, then your duty is only to convey what We have instructed you to convey. It is 
not your duty to recompense them or to take them to account - that is My duty. 

((§p Have these disbelievers not seen that We come to the land of the disbelievers diminishing it from its borders by spread¬ 
ing Islam and by the Muslims conquering it? Allah decides and decrees whatever He wills amongst His servants. No one 
can reverse, amend or alter His decision. He, may He be glorified, is swift in reckoning and He will take the earlier people 
and the later ones to account within one day. 

(jp The previous communities had plotted and devised schemes against their prophets and they rejected what they brought 
to them. What did they manage to do by such schemes? Nothing! This is because the effective plan is only that of Allah 
and no other. He, may He be glorified, is the One Who knows what their souls earn and He will recompense them for it. 
Then they will know how wrong they were in not having faith in Allah, and how right the believers were as they would 
have acquired Paradise and the best outcome. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Arousing the desire for Paradise by giving its description of flowing rivers and perpetual provision and shade. 

2. Clarification that messengers are human beings, who have wives and offspring, and that our Prophet (peace be upon 
him) is nothing new among them. He is just like them in that aspect. 


** 2 *> 9 ^ ^ ^ ^ •» >1 
























MSBSS 



^ A. 


^PlpZ- di>-^rp O'A^^ A 

(i^v^>£L^^ jo \ Jo -A—<^>\ '^^cytcy^ 

^j($) AlL^ ^ j 

£>s>5 0\ 29^5*IJ&jQ 
*^y====> ij _jyJ ^_i^^uAio3 \ 


@ Those who disbelieved in Allah say: You, O Mu¬ 
hammad, have not been sent by Allah. Tell them, O 
Messenger, Allah is sufficient as a witness between 
me and you to the fact that I have been sent from 
my Lord to you, as well as those who have knowl¬ 
edge of the heavenly scriptures that contain my de¬ 
scription. The one for whom Allah is a witness to 
His truthfulness, is not harmed by the rejection of 
those who deny him. 

Abraham (Surah Ibrahim) 

^ Themes of the Surah: 

A description of the function of messengers and 
their eagerness to remove people from the darkness 
of idolatry to the light of monotheism despite the 
reluctance of their people, to give strength to the 
Prophet (peace be upon him) and to warn those who 
do wrong. 

^ Explanation: 

Alif Lam Ra, this is a book which I have re¬ 
vealed to you, so that you may lead people out of 
darkness and into light, by the will of their Lord, 
to the path of the Almighty, the PraiseworthyThe 
discussion on similar letters has already passed 
in Surah Al-Baqarah.This Qur’an is a book that 
I revealed to you, O Messenger, so that you may 
remove people from disbelief, ignorance and mis¬ 
guidance to faith, knowledge and guidance - to the 
religion of Islam which is the way of Allah, the 
Mighty whom no one can overpower, the One Who 
deserves praise in everything. 

@ Allah, to Whom alone belongs whatever is in the heavens, and to Whom alone belongs whatever is on earth. He alone 
is the One Who deserves to be worshipped and that nothing of His creation be associated as partner to Him. Those who 
disbelieved in Allah will received a severe punishment. 

jj} Those who disbelieved in Allah prefer the life of the world and its transient pleasures over the afterlife with its eternal 
bliss. They turn people away from Allah’s path and they seek to distort His path, make it divert from the truth and move 
away from uprightness, so that no one treads it. Those described with such attributes are in error that is far from the truth 
and righteousness. 

(Sj) We did not send any messenger except that We sent him speaking the language of his people, so that they could easily 
understand what he brought from Allah. We did not send him to compel them to have faith in Allah, for Allah misguides 
whoever He wills out of His justice, and guides whoever He wills through His grace. He is the Mighty, whom no one can 
overpower, and the Wise in His creation and planning. 

© We had sent Moses and supported him with miracles indicating his truthfulness and that he was indeed sent by His 
Lord. We instructed him to remove his people from disbelief, ignorance and slavery to faith, knowledge and freedom 
from the enslavement of Pharaoh and his people. We instructed him to remind them of Allah’s days on which He blessed 
them with His favours and of the days of His retribution on which He took the deniers to task. In those days there are clear 
signs of Allah’s Oneness, His magnitude of power, His favour to the believers and His punishment of the wrongdoing 
deniers. This is something that will be of benefit to those who are steadfast in following Allah and who constantly show 
gratitude for His favours and blessings. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The function of the Qur’an and the purpose of its revelation is guidance - by removing people from the darkness of 
falsehood to the light of truth. 

2. Messengers are sent in the language of their people because this is more effective for their being understood, accepted 
and followed. 

3. The function of messengers are summarised in their guiding and leading people out of darkness to light. 






























Yon 


| L^>\ -k_*] \ C- 

£jj>£===^$k 

]J===Z>j l) i\3 >^=^3 J^==^? 

O j^jS >-^3^====^ Oj5 
1 ^^===l5 ||* 




^U3j ^j>j*j£> ^k==^j> (j* tj>i$\ 

>4Uj SI Ui^UStfjL^k 

lyp^=bl ^ Isj s5^-^3=^^- 
j 0 ^ V 3 j 

oC . A ^ . ’ 


Up Remember, O Messenger, when Moses fulfilled 
the instruction of his Lord and said to his people, 
the Israelites, reminding them of Allah’s favours to 
them: O my people, remember Allah’s favour on 
you when He saved you from the people of Phar¬ 
aoh and gave you safety from their affliction. They 
were making you suffer greatly, killing your sons, 
so that no one would be bom amongst you to take 
over Pharaoh’s kingdom, and letting your women 
live to humiliate and disgrace them. In their doing 
so was a great test of patience for you. Allah then 
rewarded you for your patience in this trial by sav¬ 
ing you from the affliction of the people of Pharaoh. 

Up Moses said to them: Remember when your Lord 
clearly announced to you: If you are grateful to Al¬ 
lah for the above-mentioned favours that He has 
blessed you with, then He will give you more from 
His favour and grace. But, if you deny His favours 
to you and do not show gratitude for them, His pun¬ 
ishment is severe for those who deny His favours 
and are not grateful for them. 

Up Moses said to his people: O my people, if you 
yourselves reject the truth and together with you all 
those on earth also reject the truth, the harm of your 
rejection will be on you, for Allah is self-sufficient 
and deserving of praise by Himself. The faith of the 
believers does not benefit Him and the rejection of 
the disbelievers does not hami Him. 

Up Has not the news of the destruction of the com¬ 
munities who disbelieved before you reached you, 

O disbelievers? The people of Noah, the Ad, the 
people of Hud, Thamud - the people of Salih - and 
the communities that came after them, which are 
so numerous that their full number is known only to Allah? Their messengers came to them with clear signs as well as 
miracles. But they did not respond to their messengers and did not believe them. They did not utter anything that indicat¬ 
ed their faith. Instead they said to their messengers: We reject what you have been sent with. We have disturbing doubts 
about what you are calling us to. 

Up Their messengers said in response to them: Can there be any doubt about Allah’s Oneness and about worshipping Him 
alone, when He is the Creator of the heavens and the earth, who brought them into existence without any precedent?! 
He calls you to have faith in Him so that He can wipe out your previous sins and defer you until such time that you can 
complete your fixed period of life in this world. Their people said to them: You are only human like us. You have no 
merit over us. You want to turn us away from what our forefathers used to worship. Bring us clear proof indicating the 
truthfulness of your claim that you are messengers from Allah to us. 

Beneficial Points: 

1. One of the means of calling towards Allah is to remind those addressed of Allah’s favours to them, especially if that is 
linked to a great favour such as victory over or salvation from an enemy. 

2. It is Allah’s grace that He promised His servants more favours in lieu of their gratitude. On the other hand. His threat 
is severe to those who reject Him. 

3. The rejection by His servants does not harm Allah at all, just as the faith of His servants does not benefit Him. He is 
self-sufficient and praiseworthy by His self. 






Ibrahim 


256 


Part 13 






















I llA VSl tL)\£=sa[j*j £.6 jlllp (Jd ^ jJjc-jjij 

5y-i|i3^4jit ^ o'4-c5 1 

UiLiti jjb jsj <w\ ( _^' L y^=^>~ 1 ^ ^ ^ W?($) I 
0^1^====^ 

L<^/\ \ Jlij^ 

5^=d4^ tj. >JL> iJ*^J\ 

\ ^lU^=SjZ^J (fr) . 

(^) (^?\jLa „_ 

\"** ^-" ? 'T— * .>*. "■' 4 •£ ^ ^ 

{J^JjHr’r **ibj Crt 

jJjU? 9 4iu^^ A^^uSN 9 AJ^>& Jo XjS dJ> ^ 
^jOV^J cjl^====LA J^==^5 OjiJ t 



@ In response to them, their messengers said: We 
are people like you, so we are not blaming you 
for imitating your forefathers in that respect. Just 
because you are people, it does not mean that you 
should imitate them in everything. Amongst His 
servants, Allah bestows unique favors on whomev¬ 
er He wishes, so He will choose some to be mes¬ 
sengers to mankind. It is forbidden for us to grant 
you whatever evidence you desire, except if Allah 
so chooses. It is not within our power to bring you 
such evidence; instead, Allah alone is the One ca¬ 
pable of doing so. Those who entrust all of their 
affairs to Allah will have trust in Him. 

@ What sort of objection or excuse would cause us 
to cease having trust in Him? He has guided us to 
the clearest and most upright path. We will be pa¬ 
tient against the harm you caused to us by belying 
and mocking us. Those who put their trust in Allah 
will entrust all of their affairs to Him alone. 

@ When those who disbelieved in Allah, from 
amongst the people to whom the messengers were 
sent, were unable to respond to the messengers’ ar¬ 
guments, they said: “We will drive you out from 
our town, or you will have to reject your religion 
and return to ours.” Allah then sent revelation to 
His messengers, as a way to strengthen them: “We 
will surely destroy the wrongdoers who disbelieved 
in Allah and His messengers.” 

O messengers, we will cause you to dwell on the 
earth after their destruction. What has been men¬ 
tioned of the destruction of the denying disbeliev¬ 
ers and causing their believing messengers to dwell 
on the earth after the disbelievers’ destruction is for 
whoever reflects on My majesty and observance of it, as well as for who feared My warning to him of the punishment. 
@ The messengers asked Allah to make them victorious over their enemies. Every person who is arrogant and stubborn 
towards the truth, who does not follow it despite it being apparent to him, is a loser. 

@ Hellfire is in front of this arrogant person, awaiting him. He will be given the puss that oozes from the people of Hell- 
fire to drink, but it will not quench his thirst. He will continue to be punished with thirst and other types of punishments. 
@ He will continue to sip it over and over because of the severity of its bitterness, its heat, and its rottenness. But he will 
not be able to swallow it. He will then be overcome by death from every direction due to the severity of the punishment. 
But he will not die and be relieved. Instead, he will remain alive and complain of the punishment. In front of him there is 
another severe punishment that awaits him. 

@ The righteous actions of the disbelievers, such as giving charity and having kindness and mercy towards a weak 
person, are like ashes on a windy day. They are carried away by the wind and scattered all over the place until no trace 
of them remains. Such are the deeds of the disbelievers, which are blown away by disbelief. These deeds will not benefit 
their owners on the Day of Judgement. Actions that are not based on faith are deviations that are far from the path of truth. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Prophets and messengers are people of the children of Adam, except that Allah, the Exalted, honored them by causing 
them to carry the message, and He chose them for it from amongst the children of Adam. 

2. The preacher who wishes to instill change must expect that he will be confronted by difficulties, including verbal and 
physical actions of dismissal, denial, and harm. 

3. Preachers and righteous people are promised victory and vicegerency on earth. 

4. The horrible fate of the wrongdoers and enemies of the Messengers, and demonstrating the punishments that Allah has 
prepared for them in the afterlife. 

5. Showing how the deeds of the disbelievers will be rejected and not considered due to their disbelief. 






















\$/\^Lju\ ^ J iS 0 | 

4J^ J lip lyt^^jJ^, >i^ J^S \Sc: j>3 ll4=»(j^ 

J\sj dr^ ^ LJ^>A 

^i===£ JsCjij Cr^ ^45 ^=^-XCj4^\ 

^io^Li ^^^===cW ^ (jl^=Uj ^-^==^jlL^\3 



@ Do you not know—and this language is directed ^fcg^| Y Q A 

to anyone it suits—that Allah created the heavens 
and the earth with truth, and He did not create them 
in vain? If He wishes to remove you, O people, 
and replace you with a different creation that will 
worship and obey Him in your place, He would 
have done so and produced a different creation that 
would worship and obey Him. It would be an easy 
matter for Him. 

@> Destroying you and replacing you with a dif¬ 
ferent creation is not difficult for Him, may He be 
Glorified. Allah is capable of all things, and Noth¬ 
ing is outside His ability. 

@ The created things emerged from their graves 
towards Allah on the Appointed Day. The weak fol¬ 
lowers said to their eminent leaders: “O masters, 
we were followers to you. We were commanded by 
your command, and forbidden by your prohibition. 

So will you protect us against any of Allah’s pun¬ 
ishments? The eminent leaders said: “If Allah had 
directed us towards guidance, we would have ush¬ 
ered you towards it. Then we would all have been 
saved from His punishment. However, we were 
misguided and we lead you astray. It is the same for 
the both of us, whether we are too weak to bear the 
punishment or are patient, there is no escaping the 
punishment for us”. 

(jp When the people of paradise entered paradise, 
and the people of hellfire entered hellfire, Iblis 
said: “Indeed Allah gave you a true promise, and 
he carried out his promise to you. I gave you a false 
promise and I failed to fulfil my promise to you. 

With whatever strength I have I will use to compel 
you in this world towards disbelief and misguidance. I invited you towards disbelieve and made sins attractive to you, 
so you were quick to follow me. Do not blame me for what befell you of misguidance, but blame yourselves because 
yourselves are more deserving of blame. I will not help you in averting your penalty, and you will not help me in averting 
my penalty. I denounce that you made me a partner with Allah in your worship. Those who do wrong by associating 
partners with Allah in this world and disbelieve in Him have a painful penalty that awaits them on the Day of Judgment. 
When Allah mentioned the fate of the disbelievers on the Day of Judgment as a way to make people fearful of Him, He 
also mentioned the fate of the believers in order to entice people towards Him. Allah said: 

{j} By contrast to the fate of the wrongdoers, Allah caused those who have faith and do good deeds to enter Paradise with 
rivers flowing under its palaces and trees. They will dwell in it eternally in the presence of their Lord. They will greet one 
another, the angels will greet them and their Lord, may He be Glorified, will greet them with peace. 

(jp O Messenger, do you not know how Allah presented an example of the monotheistic phrase: “There is no deity but 
Allah”, when He likened it to an excellent tree, the date palm. Its trunk shoots into the earth’s floor and it drinks water 
with its excellent roots. Its branches reach out into the sky, drinking from the moisture and inhaling the good wind. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Demonstrating the fate of the follower and the followed one when they both engage in wrongful acts. 

2. Demonstrating that Satan is the greatest enemy to the children of Adam, and that he is a liar, forsaken and weak. He 
will have no claim for himself nor his followers on the Day of Judgment. 

3. Iblis’s admission that the promise of Allah, the Exalted, is the truth, and that Satan’s promise is purely a lie. 

4. Likening the monotheistic phrase to a tree of sweet fruits, high branches and firm trunks. 






















’A' 6 -ly* 




ijil-->C^tXW^==\3j3 



»pL\ jJ>V\p\i •$ &\ 

<u\ y*ii3 L~-2^^ 

^y> i^-l? 

jj ^_~yi ($i Jj>3J t 

«|| o&\y£~^ 


> ~J.\ J -' 


@ This excellent tree provides its sweet fruit each 
time by the permission of its Lord. Allah, the Ex¬ 
alted, may He be Glorified, provides examples for 
people to encourage them to remember. 

{§} The example of the bad word of disbelief is that 
of a bad tree, the colocynth. It is removed from its 
foundation with no stability on the earth. Nor does 
it extend into the sky, so it dies and is scattered by 
the wind. The word of disbelief results in ruin, and 
its owner’s good deeds will not reach Allah. 

@ Through the monotheistic word, Allah makes 
the believers firm in their belief in the world until 
they die upon belief, as well as in the Transitory 
Stage in their graves when they are asked, and He 
will make them firm on the Day of Judgment. By 
causing them to associate partners with Him and 
disbelieve in Him, Allah will lead the wrongdo¬ 
ers away from guidance and what is correct. Allah 
does as He wishes when it comes to leading astray 
whomever He wants in accordance with His jus¬ 
tice and guiding whomever He wants in accordance 
with His grace. Allah cannot be coerced (may He 
be glorified). 

@ You have seen the circumstance of those who 
disbelieved in Allah and His Messenger from 
amongst Quraysh when they rejected Allah’s favor 
of having kept them safe in the Sacred Precinct. 
And in sending Muhammad, peace be upon Him, to 
them, they chose disbelief in His favours when they 
belied what he had brought them from their Lord. 
They caused their people that followed them in dis¬ 
believing to descend into the abode of destruction. 
@ The abode of destruction is the Hellfire that they 
will enter. They will suffer its heat, and the worst of dwellings with be theirs to dwell in. 

@ The idolaters made idols and counterparts for Allah so that they would lead their followers away from Allah’s path 
after they had been lead away from it. O Messenger, say to them: “Enjoy the objects of desire in your possession, and 
the spreading of doubt in the world. On the Day of Judgment your recompense will be the Hellfire, and you will have no 
other recompense besides it”. 

@ O Messenger, say to the believers: “O believers! Perform the prayer with perfection. With the wealth Allah has given 
you, give obligatory and recommended charity in a secretive manner to avoid conceit, but also openly so others will 
take you as an example. Do so before a day arrives in which there is no trade or ransom to redeem yourself from Allah’s 
punishment, nor is there any friendship where a friend may intercede on the other’s behalf’. 

{§§) Allah is the One Who has generated the heavens and the earth as things unlike anything else. He caused water to fall as 
rain from the heavens, and from that water He caused different types of crops to sprout as sustenance for you, O people. 
In accordance with His judgment, Allah subjugated ships for you to travel over water, and He subjugated rivers so that 
you could drink from them and water your livestock and crops. 

@) Allah subjugated the sun and the moon to continuously orbit. He subjugated the day and the night to alternate, the 
night for your sleep and rest and the day for your activity and work. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Comparing the word of disbelief to the crawling colocynth, which does not grow upwards, produce sweet fruit or 
endure. 

2. The link between commanding prayer and Zakat and mentioning the Hereafter is to convey the feeling that both prayer 
and charity lead to salvation in the afterlife. 


»_oi 

jjl \j 



















yv 


cAjl 

XLjo o^ 


I>sP 

bz 


<£^C-XJ AXCr ^ £-^z£LI 


%\t&£ 


^JJ 


o®\ 


@ He gave you from everything you requested, 
and even from what you did not request. If you try 
to count Allah’s favors, you will not be able to due 
to their plenitude and variety. What was mentioned 
is but examples of His favours to you. Indeed, man 
is ever oppressive towards himself and very un¬ 
grateful of Allah’s (the Exalted, may He be Glori¬ 
fied) favours. 

@ O Messenger, recall when Ibrahim said, after re¬ 
locating his son Ismael and Ismael’s mother, Hajar, 
in the valley of Makkah: “Oh Lord! Make this city, 

Makkah, in which I have placed my family, a city of 
peace wherein no blood is shed and no person op¬ 
presses another. Distance myself and my children 
from the worship of idols”. 

{§} “O Lord! The idols have misguided many peo¬ 
ple when they believed that the idols would inter¬ 
cede for them. They were allured to the idols, and 
they worshipped them instead of Allah. Whoever 
follows me in claiming Allah as One and obeying 
Him, then he is among my party and followers. 

Whoever disobeys me and does not follow me in 
claiming Allah as One and obeying Him, then You, 

O Lord, are Forgiving of the sins of whomever You 
wish and You are Merciful towards them”. 

@ “Our Lord, I have placed some of my decedents, 

Ismael and his children, to dwell in a valley (i.e., 

Makkah) in which there is no crop and no water 
inside Your sacred House. Our Lord, You caused 
them to dwell by Your House so they may uptake 
praying in it, so cause peoples’ hearts to have com¬ 
passion towards them and this city. And grant them 
sustenance from the crops in the hope that they will 
be thankful for the favors You have bestowed upon them”. 

(Sjjj) Our Lord, You know all that we keep secret and make known. Nothing on Earth or in the heavens remains hidden from 
Allah. He knows of it, so our need and dependence on Him does not remain hidden from Him. 

@ Thanks and praise are due to Allah, may He be glorified, Who answered my supplication to grant me someone right¬ 
eous. In my old age. He gave me Ismael from Hajar and Ishaq from Sara. My Lord, praised be He, hears the supplication 
of the supplicant. 

@ O Lord, make me able to perform my prayer with perfection, and make my descendants people who do that also. Our 
Lord, answer and accept our prayer. 

@ “Our Lord, forgive me my sins, and forgive the sins of my father (he said that before he knew that his father was an 
enemy of Allah. When it became clear to him that his father was Allah’s enemy, he repudiated his father). And forgive the 
sins of the believers on the day that mankind goes forth to be taken to account in front of their Lord.” 

© O Messenger, do not think that if Allah delays the punishment of the wrongdoers that He neglected their acts of lying, 
obstructing the path to Allah and other such deeds. Allah is aware of these things and nothing remains hidden from Him. 
Indeed, Allah delays their punishment until the Day of Judgment, the day that people’s eyes will stare in horror at the 
terror they will witness. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Signalling to the severity of disbelief of some of the Children of Adam despite the profuse favors Allah (the Exalted) 
has gifted them. 2. Demonstrating the excellence of Makkah, which Allah’s prophet (peace be upon him), Ibrahim, sup¬ 
plicated for. 3. Showing that it remains necessary for an individual, no matter how much his rank is elevated by doing 
what is asked of him and servitude, to continue fearing for himself and his descendants from falling into idolatry, whether 
its manifestation are significant or not. 4. Ibrahim’s (peace be upon him) supplication indicates that a servant, no matter 
how much his rank is raised, remains dependent upon Allah, the Exalted, and in need of Him. 5. One of the techniques 
of rearing: praying for the righteousness, correct belief and guidance of one’s children in upholding rites of the religion. 


\ ^ 0 \ ^ <4 

GjJ 0 



















@ When people will come forth from their graves, 
hurrying towards the caller, with their heads raised 
and anxiously gazing at the sky. Their gaze does 
not come back to them, but remains fixed because 
of the horror they witness. Their hearts are empty 
and are unable to comprehend, and they have no 
sense of understanding due to the terrifying thing 
they witness. 

@ O Messenger, make your people fear Allah’s 
punishment on the Day of Judgment. Those who 
wronged themselves by disbelieving in Allah and 
associating partners with Him will say: “Our Lord, 
give respite to us, and delay for us the punishment. 
Return us to the world for a short period so we can 
believe in You and follow the messengers you sent 
to us”. They will be given a reprimanding response: 
“Did you not swear, while you were on earth, that 
you would not be transferred from the world to the 
afterlife, and you disbelieved in the resurrection af¬ 
ter death?” 

@ You took residence in the living spaces of pre¬ 
vious nations, who before you had wronged them¬ 
selves by disbelieving in Allah, such as the nations 
of Hud and Salih. The destruction I caused to befall 
them was made clear to you. We also gave you ex¬ 
amples in the book of Allah so that you would be 
warned, but you did not take them as a warning. 
@ Those who took up residence in the living spac¬ 
es of the wrongful nations arranged a plot to kill the 
Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him) and put 
an end to his mission. Allah knows of their plans 
and nothing remains hidden from Him. Their plan 
was weak, for it is unable to move the mountains or 

anything else, contrary to Allah’s plan against them. 

@ O Messenger, do not think that Allah, Who promised His messengers victory and the establishment of the religion, 
has given up on His promise to His messengers. Allah is noble and nothing overcomes His decree. He will strengthen and 
support His allies whilst reserving severe vengeance for His enemies and the enemies of His Messengers. 

@ This revenge against the disbelievers will occur on the Day of Judgement, on the day that this earth will be exchanged 
for a barren and dustless earth and the skies will be exchanged for different skies. People will exit their graves with their 
bodies and deeds so that they can stand before Allah, Who alone is the possessor and owner of kingdom and majesty. He 
subdues and is never subdued and He defeats and is never defeated. 

@ You shall see, O Messenger, a day when the earth will be exchanged for a different earth, and the heavens will be 
changed; the disbelievers and the idolaters have been bound close to one another, and their hands and feet have been 
joined to their necks with chains. 

fj§) Their clothes will be made from resin (a highly flammable substance), and their sullen faces will be covered with fire. 
@ Allah will recompense each soul for the good and evil it did, and Allah is swift in taking account. He will account for 
the first ones on a single day, and His accounting for one will not distract Him from accounting for another. 

@ This Qur’an, which was revealed to Muhammad (peace be upon him), is a forewarning from Allah to mankind so that 
they may take heed of the warnings and severe threats in it; and so they may know that the one who is obeyed in truth 
is Allah alone so that they will worship Him and not associate any partners with Him. Also, so that those with sound 
intellects will be admonished and warned by it, as they are the ones who will benefit from admonitions and warnings. 
® Beneficial Points: 

1. Illustrating the scenes of the Day of Judgement, people’s grief, their fear, their weakness, their terror and the changing 
of the earth and the heavens. 

2. Describing the severity of the punishment and humiliation that will befall the people of disobedience and disbelief on 
the Day of Judgement. 

3. Indeed the servant has control over the affairs of his life in this world, so he ought to strive towards doing what is asked 
of him. Allah, the Exalted, will not grant him another opportunity when He resurrects him on the Day of Judgement. 



fly* 






jp 

^==L 

_ , -9,0 ^ ^ ^9 ^0 ^0 y* O J 

0 





Ibrahim 


I 

tf- 


261 


Part 13 

















The Rocky Tract (Surah Hijr) 


® Themes of the Surah: 

It focuses on warning liars of the punishment, by 
illustrating scenes of those who are doomed. It also 
warns those to whom the Surah is addressed and 
offers support to the believers. 

® Explanation: 

{J} This surah begins with the disconnected letters, 
the explanation for which has already preceeded in 
Surah Baqarah. These verses are very significant, 
which indicates that they are revealed from Allah. 
They are verses of a Qur’an that clarifies monothe¬ 
ism and sacred laws. 

On the Day of Judgement, when things become 
clear to them, the disbelievers will wish they were 
Muslim. The falsity of their ways in the world will 
be made clear to them. 

O Messenger, leave these beliers to eat as the 
beasts eat, and to avail themselves of the finite 
pleasures of the world and let their hopes distract 
them from faith and righteous actions. They will 
come to know the loss they are in when they face 
Allah on the Day of Judgement. 

For each oppressive town that became de¬ 
stroyed, Allah already knew of its fixed time. The 
destruction will neither come before or after its 
time. CfjS A nation will not be destroyed before its 
appointed time, and its destruction will not be de¬ 
layed when its time arrives. The wrongdoers should 
not have hope in Allah delaying their fate, The 
disbelievers from Makkah said to the Messenger 
(peace be upon him): O you to whom the remem¬ 



9jr 

[^==jc ^===^ 1 ^^^ 

^ \ 15^3 cyt 



brance was revealed (as the Messenger himself used to claim), your claims make you out to be one who is possessed, and 
you behave as possessed people do. Why do you not call forth the angels to testify on your behalf, or why do you not 
ask for us to be destroyed because of our disbelief? @ In response to their idea of having the angels brought forth, Allah 
said: I will not send the angels except when it becomes wise to do so, that is, when your time comes to be penalised. And 
if the angels were sent and they did not believe, then their punishment would become imminent. @ I alone revealed this 
Qur’an to the heart of Muhammad (peace be upon him) as a reminder for people. I will guard the Qur’an from anything 
being added to it or subtracted from it, or anything in it being exchanged or altered. @ O Messenger, I sent before you 
messengers to prior groups of disbelievers and they belied them. So you are not an exceptional messenger from the 
perspective of being made out as a liar by your people. @ Previous groups of disbelievers did not receive a messenger 
except that they belied and ridiculed him. @ As I left the lies in the hearts of those nations, I will leave it as well in the 
hearts of the Makkahn idolaters, because of their opposition and stubbornness. djfj) They do not believe in this Qur’an 
that was revealed to Muhammad (peace be upon him). Allah’s custom in destroying those who bely their messengers has 
occurred before, so the beliers should take that into consideration. @ These liars will remain stubborn even if the truth 
became obvious to them through clear proofs, even if I opened for them a door from the heavens and they continued to 
ascend through it. jj|) They would not believe, and they said: Our eyes could no longer see, and what we saw was the 
effects of magic, so we are bewitched. 

® Beneficial Points: 1. The noble Qur’an is possessed of the attributes of perfection in every way, clarity and exposi¬ 
tion. 2. The disbelievers will regret their disbelief on the Day of Judgment, and they will wish they had been Muslims. 
3. Disbelievers normally concern themselves with materialistic things, so you find them entrenched in their desires and 
passions, deluded by a false sense of security, busying themselves with the world more than the Hearafter. 4. The destruc¬ 
tion of the disbelieving nations that belied the messengers because of their ignorance, disbelief, and belying the verses of 
Allah and His messenger. 5. The destruction of the nations is determined to be on a specific date, decided for a specific 
time, it will not be made earlier nor later and Allah will not make it faster for the sake of anyone. 6. Allah, the Exalted, 
made it is responsibility to preserve the noble Qur’an from being altered or changed and being added to or subtracted 
from until the Day of Judgment. 





























^JS\ SjLZ\ ^0 ^^3 J-&2* cf at 

l^^lLS^jQ^Sxa ol^-i j4jb5la 

j}0 

2 \j&0&> £j$o!&fc 0$ gjt 

0 ^Jb^Cj^ ^L^ -5 J ^k? $1 ||P 

■>^> ^ ^/'X ^ ^ ^ ^ 

\j~Ap O^-X-fi^-^-^ ' \j^ip-X^Jj 

Hi^ii5 ®JL£1^0 1 

A_^ CU^xA^ 9 34^a^>J\ jil^ ( ^ Ojv — 

4 -^/-^ -' 9 4 ^ ^ ^ O y ^-3 ^ 

^4*^=^l3J3 



@ We placed in the heavens great stars so as to 
guide people on their travels in the darkness of the 
desert and the sea. We also created them for those 
who ponder them, so that they would come to un¬ 
derstand the ability of Allah, may He be glorified. 
@ We protected the heavens from every satan that 
is rejected from Allah’s mercy. 

@ Except for those who try to secretly listen to the 
high realm, they will be struck with a flaming me¬ 
teor and they will be burned. 

@ I flattened the earth so that people would dwell 
on it, and we placed sturdy mountains on it so that 
it (i.e. the earth) would not shake the people, and I 
planted in it a variety of crops [...] 

(jp O people, I have placed for you on the earth 
foods and drinks that would sustain you so long as 
you are in the worldly life. 

@ For all that benefits people and animals I am 
able to produce it and benefit people with it. I do 
not provide such things except according to a spe¬ 
cific quantity determined by My wisdom and will. 
{§} I sent the winds to fertilise the cloud, and I sent 
rain down from the fertilised clouds and I nourished 
you from rain water. O people, you are not contain¬ 
ers of this water on earth in springs and wells, rath¬ 
er Allah is the One Who contains the water in them, 
(jp I revive the dead by creating them out of nothing 
and resurrecting them after death. And I cause the 
living to die when their time comes. I am the One 
Who will remain and inherit the earth and whatever 
is upon it. 

@ I know of who was bom and died before you, 
and of those who will be born and die after. Nothing 


of that is hidden from Me. 

@) O Messenger, your Lord will gather them all on the Day of Judgment in order to credit the good doer for his good 
deeds, and the evil doer for his sins. He is Wise in His arrangement and knowledgeable. Nothing is hidden from Him. 
{j) I created Adam from dried clay, if it is stmck it sounds. This clay that he was created from is black and of an altered 
scent beacuse of the duration it has been left. 

2 ) j I created the father of the jinn from scolding fire before I created Adam (upon him be peace). 

(jp O Messenger, remember when Allah said to the angels and Iblis, who was with them: I will create a being from dried 
clay that rings when it is hit, it is black and of an altered scent. 

2 3 If I fashion his image and perfect his creation then prostrate to him in obedience to My command and to greet him. 
@) The angels obeyed, so they all prostrated as their Lord commanded them. 

@ As for Iblis, who was with the angels but was not one himself, refused to prostrate to Adam along with the angels. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. It calls on the servant to reflect and ponder over the sky and its decoration, and to take it as an indicator of Allah’s 
existence. 

2. All types of wealth and decrees are controlled by Allah alone. Its treasures are in His hand and He gives to and takes 
away from whom He wills according to His wisdom and mercy. 

3. The earth is created, paved and extended to accommodate human life on it. It is stabilised by high mountains so that 
it would not move with its inhabitants on it. It has on it different crops of known quantities in accordance with wisdom 
and welfare. 



















m\ 


I 


j&iX\ &^\s^o£0X?p <3 is 

ifGla J ^0 -43idlA^^ 4p J\i(™)o^ 

U^oj J^S J&u\ ,($) ’02 

OH 




S“-0i5 ($) 5^ 

^ 1 ($) ^ ^ * 41 ^ 4 ^ 


^ > 


@ After Iblis refused to prostrate to Adam, Allah 
said to him: What kept you and prevented you from 
prostrating with the angels, who prostrated out of 
obedience to My command? 

@ Iblis arrogantly said: It is not proper for me to 
prostrate to a being You created out of dried clay 
that used to be black, malleable clay. 

(S§»j) Allah said to Iblis: Exit from paradise, for you 
are banished. 

@ Upon you is My damnation and banished you 
are from My mercy until the Day of Judgment. 

@ Iblis said: O Lord, allow me to live and do not 
cause me to die until the day that Adam and his off¬ 
spring are resurrected. 

@ Allah (the Exalted) said: You are of those who I 
will grant a long life. 

@ Until the time when all created things will die, 
upon the first blow of the Horn. 

{§} Iblis said: O Lord, because You misguided me, I 
will make sins on earth seem attractive to them, and 
I will lead them all astray from the straight path. 

@ Except for those servants You select to be wor¬ 
shipful to You. 

@ Allah said: This is a straight path that leads to 
Me. 

@ You have no power or sway over tempting My 
sincere servants, except for those who follow you 
who are led astray. 

@ Hellfire is the promised abode of Iblis and all 
those who follow him who have been led astray. 

Hellfire has seven doors through which they en¬ 
ter. For each of its doors, there is a known amount 
of the followers of Iblis who will enter through it. 

@ Those who were mindful of Allah, by obeying His command and staying away from disobedience will have gardens 
and springs. 

(S|| When they enter, it will be said to them: Enter it with safety from any misfortune and security from any fears. 

@ I removed what was in their chests of enmity and envy. They are brethren beloved to one another, sitting upon thrones 
and looked upon one another. 

(Sj§) Fatigue does not affect them, and they will not be made to leave it. Rather, they will remain in it forever. 

O Messenger, inform My servants that I am the Forgiving towards whomever of them repents, and I am Merciful to 
them. 

And inform them that My punishment is the severe punishment, so they should repent to Me so they can receive My 
forgiveness and be safe from My punishment. 

And inform them of the story of the guests of Ibrahim (peace be with him) that were angels who came to give him glad 
tidings of a child, and news of the destructions of the people of Lot. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Allah’s commandment to the angels to prostrate to Adam ennobles mankind. 

2. In these verses is an indication for the mutual visitations amongst the pious, their gatherings and the uprightness of their 
character towards one another such that each of them is accepting of one another and not antagonistic. 

3. It is important for a servants heart to always be feeling both fear and hope as well as desire and aversion. 

4. All the angels prostrated to Adam to greet and ennoble him, except for Iblis who rejected and abstained. 

5. Over those who Allah has guided, selected and chosen, Iblis has no power to cause them to fall into sin and prevent 
them from receiving Allah’s forgiveness. 

6. Teaching guests to uphold the manners of offering greetings and peace upon the arrival of others. 


0 


Hijr 


264 


















no 




j jjv L 3 \ 2 >\ 3 te \ ji 2> | 

o^ 3 ^ ($i ^Ap4^>4A4^l J^lP ^ 

i^z) CjZ'C/*J J ^ ($) ^ Crt 

\ J Is (^) 

4j tl ^ uSl 1^)^ m>->-^ 1 j \5\U£0j 

sJ ^ ^4^eSii ^ 

L } 13 ( ^ ) \ \>j> L \ \ g. Xl^-l^As (v)^ 

£2?)j j 4 ^ C ^ 

\ jwi\ ^ I 

j ($) _* 


@ When they came to him and said, Peace. He an¬ 
swered them with a greeting that was better than 
theirs and presented them with a roasted calf for 
them to eat because he thought that they were hu¬ 
man. When they did not eat of it he said: We are 
afraid of you. 

@ The Messenger from the Angels said: Do not be 
afraid! We will tell you something that will make 
you glad. You are going to have a son with great 
knowledge. 

@ Abraham, being surprised at the good news of 
a baby boy they gave him, said to them: Do you 
bring me this good news despite the fact that old 
age has reached me? What kind of good news are 
you bringing me? 

@ The Messengers from the Angels said to Abra¬ 
ham: We bring you good news of the truth in which 
there is no doubt, so do not be among those who 
despair from the good news we bring you. 

@ Abraham said: Does anyone despair from the 
mercy of his Lord but those who have deviated 
from Allah’s straight path?! 

@ Abraham said: What is the matter that has 
brought you - O Messengers - from Allah? 

(jjS) The Messenger from the Angels said: Allah has 
sent us to destroy a people who are guilty of great 
corruption and evil, the people of Lot. 

|j§5 Except the family of Lot and the believers that 
follow him for they will not be included in the de¬ 
struction and We will save them all from it. 

@ Except for his wife, for We have decreed her 
to be one of those who stay behind included in the 
destruction. 


(p When the Messengers from the Angels came to the family of Lot in the form of men. 

(jp Lot (peace be with him) said to them: I do not recognise you, nor do I know who you are. 

@> The Messengers from the Angels said to Lot: Do not fear! We have brought to you - O Lot - the destructive punishment 
that your people have doubts about. 

{§p We have brought to you the truth in which there is no joke, and we are truthful in the information we give you. 

@ So travel with your family after a portion of the night has passed. Travel behind them and let none of you look back 
to see what happens to them. Proceed to where Allah has instructed you to go. 

(Jj) We made known to Lot by means of revelation the matter that We had decreed, which was that those people will be 
annihilated by the last of them being destroyed when morning comes. 

@) The people of Sodom came rejoicing at the guests of Lot, with the desire to commit indecency. 

@ Lot said to them: These people are my guests, so do not disgrace me by what you want with them. 

(jg) Fear Allah by leaving this indecent behaviour and do not humiliate me by this heinous act of yours. 

(Sj) His people said to him: Did we not forbid you from hosting anyone? One who provides a warning has in effect ex¬ 
cused himself for taking someone to account for not abiding by it. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The need to guide towards something that is permissible and not unlawful, just as Lot guided his people to marriage. 

2. The person whom Allah has blessed with guidance and knowledge can never become despondent of Allah’s mercy. 

3. It is Sunnah to hasten when passing the ruins of people whom Allah has destroyed, as these are places of anger and 
curse. 

4. Allah prohibited Lot and his followers from turning back when the punishment was descending on the people of Lot 
so that they do not become overtaken by pity for them. 

5. The resolve of the people of Lot to commit indecency with these guests is an indication of their nature being effaced 
and the extremity of their immorality. 

















@ Lot (peace be with him) said to them: These are 
the women of my people, who are like daughters to 
me. Marry them if you want to satisfy your desires. 

By your life - O Messenger - the people of Lot 
wander blindly in pursuit of their lusts. 

@ The destructive punishment seized them at the 
time of sunrise. 

We turned their towns upside down and rained 
on them a shower of petrified clay. 

@ In the incident mentioned about the punishment 
that descended on the people of Lot there are signs 
for those who ponder. 

fji) The towns of the people of Lot are on an exist¬ 
ing road and can be seen by travellers who pass by. 
@ In that which occurred there is a sign for the 
believers to take lesson from. 

@ The people of Shuayb, who lived in a town sur¬ 
rounded by intertwined trees, were wrongdoers; 
because of their denial of Allah and rejection of His 
Messenger, Shuayb (peace be with him). 

@ We took retribution from them when the punish¬ 
ment seized them. The towns of the people of Lot 
and the dwellings of the people of Shuayb are on a 
path clear to those who pass by. 

@ Indeed the Thamud, who were the people of Hijr 
(a place between Hijaz and the Levant) had in effect 
rejected all the Messengers when they rejected their 
prophet, Salih (peace be with him.) 

We gave them proofs and signs to indicate his 
truthfulness in what he brought from his Lord. One 
of these was the she-camel. But they did not take 
a lesson from those signs and paid no attention to 
them. 


?\ o 1.3 


> \ 


£-JCa- 




(A*") L \ \j£ [^L * \ 







■ (^) 


I P Hijr P I|S^PS[p|j | 266 " 


1D They used to carve out dwellings in the rocks of the mountains in which they lived safe from that which they feared, 
jD Then the bolt of the punishment seized them in the morning. 

5p The wealth and the dwellings that they had gained did not ward off Allah’s punishment. 

(Sj) We did not create the heavens and the earth and we did not create everything between them in vain without any wis¬ 
dom. We only created all of that with a true purpose. The Hour will certainly come, so, O Messenger, ignore those who 
reject you and pardon them graciously. 

C§| Your Lord, O Messenger, is the Creator and the Knower of everything. 

{§} We have given you ‘The Opening (Surah Al-Fatihah)’ which consists of seven verses and We have given you the 
Grand Qur’an. 

dj§S) Do not extend your sight to the temporary enjoyments We have given to some classes of disbelievers and do not grieve 
over their rejection. Be humble with the believers. 

Say - O Messenger: I am indeed a warner of the punishment and I make clear that which will guide you. 

I warn you of a punishment similar to that which Allah sent down on those who formed an alliance to deny the mes¬ 
sengers. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. When Allah intends to destroy a town, their evil and transgression increases. When it reaches its peak He imposes on 
them the retribution they deserve. 

2. In the story of Lot there is a lesson and admonition for true believers. 

3. It is disliked to enter places of punishment. 

4. The sight of a believer should not long for the ornaments of the world when he has knowledge of the Mighty and 
Majestic Master. 

5. A believer must remain far from the idolaters and must not grieve if they do not have faith. He must be close to the 
believers, humble before them and loving towards them - even if they are poor. 

















] *Jjr* 


nv 


| 




Uf^i* 


\V$> 


.yD 

2 ^ ^ < ^ ^ ^ . /. <" ^- -^> 9 


2)0 A^USU 



JjyA~ \ <iijj\j <j^~^j 3 j o xIp^j (^) oix^xi^ o^- 




|jp »^»wi3L. 

£^5 IOj ,^* ^'•^$_j A ^ Cyi ^0 * >> ^ == 4~^-2 \ iJ_/«-iCj)) 

^ oyOi \" 

0 ^^===^15 l^Laj *. <3 3 p^==^L^aL>- 

I $X^x* N o^j ^Ijj^y o^r <J W^ p-^=4j(^) 


@ Those who accepts parts of the Qur’an and al¬ 
lege other parts to be sorcery, soothsaying or poetry. 
|jS) By your Lord, O Messenger, I will on the Day 
of Judgement bring all those who break it into parts 
to account. 

@ We will question them about the disbelief and 
sins they committed in the world. 

@ So announce, O Messenger, the invitation to¬ 
wards Allah that He has instructed you to do and 
do not pay any attention to what the idolaters say 
and do. 

@ Do not be afraid of them, for we are enough 
for you against those leaders of disbelief from the 
Quraysh who mock at you. 
d§j> Those who take another deity along with Allah. 
They will soon come to know the evil outcome of 
their associating partners with Allah. 

(S§p We know that your heart, O Messenger, is con¬ 
strained by the rejection and mockery of you that 
emanates from them. 

@ So resort to Allah by declaring His transcend¬ 
ence from everything not appropriate for Him, and 
by praising Him with the attributes of His perfec¬ 
tion; and be one of those who worship Allah and 
pray to Him. In that there is a cure for the strain on 
your heart. 

@ Go on worshipping your Lord and continue do¬ 
ing so as long as you live until death comes to you 
in that state. 

The Bee (SOrah Al-Nahl) 

{•} Themes of the Surah: 

The surah focuses on reminding man of the many blessings that surround him that prove the existence of a Creator ne¬ 
cessitating servitude to Him, and warns the consequences of ingratitude. 

® Explanation: 

{J) The Hour and the punishment that Allah has decreed for you - O disbelievers - is close, so do not ask for it to come 
sooner than its time. Exalted is He and High above that which they associate with Him in their worship. @ He sends 
down the angels to whichever of His Messengers He wills with revelation that brings life to the souls: Saying: Warn O 
Messengers, the people against associating partners with Allah, for there is no one deserving of worship besides Me. Be 
mindful of me - O People - by fulfilling my instructions and avoiding my prohibitions. {Jj} Allah created the heavens and 
the earth without any precedent for a true purpose. He did not create them in vain, but created them to serve as a sign of 
His greatness. He is Exalted and high above their ascribing others as partners to Him. He created man from a despised 
drop of fluid who then progressed from one form to another until he became a harsh contender using falsehood to attempt 
to invalidate with it the truth, being an obvious opponent in his arguing. @ He also created livestock such as camels, 
cattle and goats for your benefit - O People. Some of these benefits include deriving warmth from their wool and hair and 
other benefits from their milk, skin and backs. Some of them serve as food that you eat. @ There is beauty in them for 
you in the evening and in the morning when you take them out to graze. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. In the verses there is proof that all people will be questioned: both disbelievers as well as believers, with the exception 
of those who enter paradise without reckoning. 2. Allah’s care and attention to protecting the Prophet (peace be upon 
him) from the harm of the idolaters. 3. Glorifying, praising and praying to Allah is the cure for worries and grief and the 
way out of crises, dilemmas and anguish. 4. A Muslim is required to go on worshipping, in the form of ritual prayer, until 
death comes to him, as long as his mind is not overcome by a state of unconsciousness or loss of memory. 5. The creation 
of the heavens and the earth and the creation of man is a clear sign of Allah’s power, existence and oneness. 

6. Similarly the creation of livestock and their many benefits of which mankind enjoys is another sign of Allah’s power 
and oneness. 7. Allah has given us ownership of livestock and animals and subjugated them to us. He has permitted us 
to control and take benefit from them, out of His mercy for us. 


























jsSiiVj 


Y1A 








(0 These livestock that We created for you carry 
your heavy goods when you travel to places that 
you would only be able to reach after bearing great 
hardship on yourselves. Your Lord - O People - is 
Kind and Merciful to you as He has subjugated 
these livestock to you. 

0 He created horses, mules and donkeys for you to 
ride and carry your goods on and for them to be an 
adornment for you that you can beautify yourselves 
with amongst people. He will create in the future 
means of transport and other things that you do not 
know about. 

(Sj) Allah has made it a duty upon Himself to show 
the Path that leads to His Pleasure, which is Islam. 

Some paths are that of Satan that deviate away from 
the truth. Any path other than the path of Islam is 
deviated. Had Allah willed to guide you all to Faith 
He would have guided you alltogether. 

((j| He, may He be glorified, is the One Who sent 
down for you water from the clouds. From this wa¬ 
ter you have a drink that you and your livestock can 
drink of. From it you get vegetation on which you 
can graze your animals. 

(@ With that water, Allah grows for you the crops 
that you eat. He also grows for you olives, date- 
palms and grapes as well as other types of fruit. In 
that water and the things that it gives rise to there 
is a sign of Allah’s power for people who ponder 
over His creation and use it as evidence of Allah’s 
greatness. 

@ Allah subjugated the night for you so that you 
can find peace and rest in it, and the day so that you 
can earn your livelihood in it. He put the sun at your 
service and made it bright and the moon, which He made a light. The stars are subjugated for you by His decree, which 
you use for navigation in the darknesses of the sea and land and by which you come to know time etc. In the subjugation 
of all of these things there are clear signs of Allah’s power for people who apply their minds, for they are the ones who 
will grasp the wisdom in them. 

@ He, may He be glorified, also subjugated for you the things on earth that He created having diverse colours such as 
minerals, animals, plants and crops. In what He has created and subjugated for you there is a clear sign of Allah’s power 
for people to pay heed and realise that Allah is a powerful benefactor. 

He, may He be glorified, is the One Who subjugated the sea for you and enabled you to travel on it and to extract what 
is in it, so that you can eat the fresh and soft meat of the fish that you catch and that you can extract from it jewellery that 
you and your wives can wear such as pearls and coral. You see the ships splitting the waves of the ocean and you travel 
on these ships in search of Allah’s bounty in the form of profit you gain from trade. All of this is for you to be grateful to 
Allah for the favours He has given you and to worship Him alone. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Allah’s statement: (He creates what you do not know) includes all modern means of transportation and travel. 

2. Allah created the stars as a means of beauty for the sky, for guidance in the darkness of the land and sea, and to know 
the time and seasons. 

3. Praise and gratitude for Allah who has blessed us with things that improve our lives and standard of living. 

4. The sending down (of water) and causing plants to grow is a sign of Allah’s power, existence and oneness for people 
who ponder and reflect. 

5. Allah has favoured us by subjugating the sea so that its meat (fish) is eaten, its pearls and coral are extracted, and it is 
travelled on for purposes of trade and defending the lands from the harm and aggression of an enemy. 


^>1^5 as 

I aa • 
















\>j cdddcj 0 C)J X~yj£=dfy 


E ,A 


~d^jj^= s x>'3d»\. 

0 X^djJddi "dd dlJdydyia^l 4ji( XJjdj Xju 
{£) o^SJcdj jlj ca$j 

d>lyd\ 0 ddd djd^d ad o Ji Cji If* 

‘d[^=U^\&ilJ cd*Ji dd>\ 0 TJLliL 9 <^d>\dp 


I 


'-S±$\ApSdcsM %& j| 
o&\j3 

\ 50 dis&d- 


^r 

\dJd£\Jk>JXZ^ 
>^4j 3>&\$ 

J^ck^^j'^S^===LA \ Judjy*' 


f 


ciI3t 'b~ s £y^' 


'^ddddd 


@ He spread out mountains on earth to keep it firm 
so that it does not shake and cause you to become 
unsettled. He caused rivers to flow so that you can 
drink from them and give water to your livestock 
and crops. He split in it pathways for you to tread 
and reach your destinations without losing your 
way. @ He made for you on earth clear landmarks 
that you could be guided by when travelling dur¬ 
ing the day. He also made for you stars in the sky 
that you could use as a guide at night. @ Is the 
one who creates all these things like the one who 
does not create anything?! Do you not think about 
the greatness of Allah who created everything and 
worship Him alone without ascribing as partners to 
Him what has not created anything? (Sj} If you - O 
people - tried to count and list Allah’s many bless¬ 
ings that He has favoured you with, you will not 
be able to do so because they are so numerous and 
SC diverse. Allah is Forgiving, as He did not take you 
^ > gjf* to task for being neglectful of showing thanks to 

Him, and Merciful, as he did not stop these bless¬ 
ings from you on account of your sins and failure 
to thank Him. @ Allah knows the actions that you 
- O servants - conceal and those that you reveal. 
None of those actions are hidden from Him and He 
will recompense you for them. @ Those whom 
the idolaters worship besides Allah, do not create 
anything no matter how little. Those who worship 
them besides Allah are the ones who make them. 
How do they worship besides Allah those idols 
which they make with their own hands?! @ De¬ 
spite the fact that the idol worshippers made their 
Allahs with their own hands, they are also lifeless 
things that have no life nor knowledge. They do not 
know when they will be resurrected with their worshippers on the Day of Judgement, to be thrown together with them 
into the fire of Hell, {j) The only being that truly deserves to be worshipped is only one being who has no partner and that 
is Allah. Those who deny the resurrection and the recompense, their hearts are arrogant and they do not fear the reckon¬ 
ing. They therefore do not believe that there will be any reckoning or retribution. They are arrogant and refuse to accept 
the truth. @ Truly, Allah knows the actions that these people conceal and He knows the actions they reveal. Nothing is 
hidden from Him and He will recompense them for that. He, may He be glorified, does not love those who are too proud 
to worship and submit to Him. Instead he detests such people intensely. <3 When these people who deny the oneness of 
the Creator and who reject the resurrection are asked: What did Allah reveal to Muhammad (peace be upon him)? They 
say: He did not reveal anything to him. It is only that he himself has brought stories and fables of the earlier ones. @ 
So that their outcome will be that they will bear their sins without any reduction, and they will also bear some of the sins 
of those they misled from Islam on account of ignorance and blind imitation. How terrible will be that which they will 
carry from their own sins and the sins of their followers, jj) The disbelievers before these people devised plots against 
their Messengers. Allah then destroyed their buildings from the foundations and as a result their roofs fell on them from 
above. The punishment came to them from where they did not expect as they had expected their buildings to protect them 
but they were destroyed by them. 

® Beneficial Points: 1. There is an indication in the verses to the utilisation of the means to something, for Allah was 
able to make the earth stable without the mountains. 2. The verses contain a significant amount of the various types of 
Allah’s favours to His servants, in brief and in detail. By this Allah calls the servants to be thankful to Him and to remem¬ 
ber Him and pray to Him. 3. The nature of man is to do wrong and to dare to commit sins and be neglectful of the rights 
of his Lord, being ungrateful for Allah’s favours. Only those whom Allah has guided show thanks and acknowledge His 
favours. 4. It was out of compassion that Abraham (peace be on him) prayed for the forgiveness and mercy of Allah for 
the sinners. 5. Allah causes the plot of His enemies to fail and their plot become became a burden for them since it was 
their own scheming that caused their destruction! 6. A clarification of the state of the misguided and those who caused 
their misguidance, and that the latter are worse in position on the Day of Judgment. 7. Allah grasps sinners at the time of 
death in a severe manner because of the sudden and terrible nature of His seizure, unlike something that occurs gradually 
and gently which has less effect. 


-lyt-dd pi 


















YV< 


lAi 


o - '"’" 

^ -y *^o ^5 'c- °ifO ^ ^ 

liL^ 

d^ V * V^ \SiJL^jJi^ £^iUs> 



aXA 


#>«* 

4sW 


U=> . ~ 



-sj>: 



@ Then on the Day of Judgment Allah will humil¬ 
iate and disgrace them with His punishment and He 
will say to them: Where are my partners whom you 
used to associate with me in worship and because 
of which you used to oppose the prophets and the 
believers? Those who were righteous scholars will 
then say:: Indeed! Humilation and torment on this 
Day will necessarily cover the disbelievers. 

|Jj) Those whose souls are taken by the angel of 
death and his aides while wronging themselves in 
their disbelief will submit with full surrender when 
death actually comes to them, and they will deny 
the disbelief and sins they used to do, thinking that 
such denial will be of benefit to them. It will be said 
to them: You have lied. You were disbelievers who 
used to commit sin. Allah knows everything that 
you used to do in the world. Nothing is hidden from 
Him and He will recompense you for that. 

{§} It will be said to them: Enter in accordance with 
your deeds through the doors of Hell to live therein 
forever. What an evil place of residence for those 
who were too arrogant to have faith in Allah and 
worship Him alone. 

((j) Yet those who were mindful of their Lord by 
fulfilling His instructions and avoiding His prohi¬ 
bitions were asked: What did your Lord send down 
to your Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him)? 

They replied: Allah has sent down on him great 
good. For those who worshipped Allah well and 
treated His creation well in this worldly life there 
is an excellent reward including victory and abun¬ 
dance of sustenance. And the reward that Allah has 
prepared for them in the Hearafter will be better 
then what He has already given them in the world. What an excellent home is the home of the afterlife for those who are 
mindful of their Lord by fulfilling His instructions and avoiding His prohibitions! 

They will enter gardens of residence and permanence with rivers flowing below their palaces and trees. In these gar¬ 
dens they will have every type of food, drink and other pleasures that they desire. This type of reward, which He gives 
to those who are mindful from the nation of Muhammad (peace be upon him), He also gives to those who were mindful 
from the previous communities. 

(jp Those whose souls are taken by the angel of death and his aides while their hearts were free from disbelief, the angels 
will address them saying: Peace be on you. You are safe from every difficulty. Enter paradise because of the correct belief 
and good actions that you used to do in the world. 

@ Are these denying idolaters waiting for anything but the angel of death and his aides to come to take their souls and 
strike their faces and their backs, or for Allah’s command to come to eradicate them by means of a punishment in the 
world? Similar to those idolaters who came before who were destroyed because if their idolatry; so too the idolaters of 
Makkah may perhaps meet the same fate. Allah did not wrong them when He destroyed them but they wronged their own 
souls by bringing them to the point of destruction because of their disbelief in Allah. 

@ So the retribution of the actions they used to do came down on them and they were surrounded by the punishment they 
used to mock at whenever they were reminded of it. 

® Beneficial Points: 1. The virtue of the people of knowledge and that they are the ones who speak the truth in the world 
and on the day when the witnesses will stand; and that their statement is given consideration by Allah and His creation. 

2. It is Allah’s generosity and grace that He will give the people of paradise everything they desire, to the extent that He 
will remind them of bounties they desire that they will not be aware of. 

3. Action is the cause and basis for entering paradise and being saved from the fire, and this will happen by Allah’s mercy 
and favour to the believers - not by their own efforts or design. 

4. The etiquette of the Angels with Allah is that they attributed knowledge to Allah without saying: “We know what you 
used to do”, indicating that the only way they knew is because Allah taught it to them.” 

















7ut\ \jxJ?£-\ y ^J^t) <AJ*i J- ^-= =^IxSjO Jjkj(™) 
_. ^ ^ ^ 

I o^j$) 



C^i-> O^ 4^CU^S>^4Uj\ -X-£>- 4ji\j \jL1a\j 

^ \^>-^iL>\ Jscj 



@ Those who associated others with Allah in their 
worship said: Had Allah willed for us to worship 
Him alone and not to ascribe any partners to Him, 
we would not have worshipped anything besides 
Him, neither us, nor our ancestors before us. Had 
He willed for us not to prohibit anything we would 
not have done so. The disbelievers of the past also 
presented such false arguments. The duty of the 
Messengers is only to clearly communicate what 
they have been instructed to convey and they have 
done so. The disbelievers cannot present fate as an 
argument after Allah has given them free will and 
choice and sent to them His Messengers. 

<|fS) We had sent to every previous nation a Messen¬ 
ger instructing his nation to worship Allah alone, 
and leave the worship of others beside Him such 
as idols, satans etc. Some of them were guided by 
Allah and had faith in Him, while others rejected 
Allah and went against His Messenger so He did 
not guide them and they deserved misguidance. So 
travel through the earth to see for yourselves what 
the end result of the deniers was after the punish¬ 
ment and destruction came upon them. 

@ Even though you - O Messenger - try everything 
you can to call these people being so eager for their 
guidance, Allah will not guide those whom He mis¬ 
guides and they will have none besides Allah to as¬ 
sist them by protecting them from the punishment. 
(Sj) These deniers swore their most serious oaths: 
Allah will not resurrect anyone who dies, without 
their having any proof of that. Yes indeed, Allah 
will resurrect everyone who dies, being His bind¬ 
ing promise, because the one who brought them to 
life from non-existence without any precedent is able to bring them back to life after having caused them to die. But most 
people do not know that Allah will resurrect the dead and they therefore deny the resurrection. 

@ Allah will resurrect them all on the Day of Judgement to make clear to them the things they differed about such as His 
Oneness, the resurrection and prophethood and so that the disbelievers may realise that they were false in their claim of 
Allah’s having partners and in their denial of the resurrection. 

{§§) Indeed when I want to bring the dead to life and ressurect them then there will be nothing to prevent Me from doing 
so. When We will something to happen, all that We say is, ‘Be,’ and it definitely becomes. 

@ Those who left their homes, families and wealth emigrating from the land of disbelief to the land of Islam in search 
for Allah’s pleasure after having been persecuted by the disbelievers, we will make them settle in the world in a place in 
which they will be honoured. But the reward of the afterlife is greater because it includes paradise. If those who remained 
behind from emigration knew the reward of those who emigrate they would not have remained behind. 

@ These emigrants in Allah’s way are the ones who were patient against the harm of their people and the separation from 
their families and homes. They were steadfast in Allah’s obedience. They rely only on their Lord in all their affairs and 
Allah therefore gave them this great reward. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The mission and goal of Messengers in all communities in general is one, which is to call towards the worship of Allah 
alone and to leave the worship of false Allahs. 2. The intelligent person is the one who takes lesson from what occurred 
to the misguided deniers, and their eventual min, devastation, suffering and destruction. 

3. The wisdom behind resurrection and the return to the afterlife is for Allah to show the tmth about the things that people 
differed in such as resurrection and everything else. 

4. The virtue of patience and reliance. Patience because of what it necessitates of controlling ones soul, and reliance 
because of turning ones heart away from the creation and focusing on Allah. 

5. The reward for the emigrants who left their homes and wealth and were patient against harm having relied on their 
Sustainer will be a better place of residence, a good position, a pleasant life, abundant and pure sustenance, victory over 
enemies and sovereignty over the lands and people. 



ij 4^3 Oj 

;V' 

















1 vjr* 


YVY 




<t\^ IV^p ]jZh^)j : j££c^s> 5 &\ 

J^4^ \±}y U ^ 

o^S^ \j^J*j&\ ^jl*J^C)\ cJ^Ll^ \j^-* CJ^ *lyt& 

lA$ <j9j£-'\p g^ Ai>-\j^\ (^) ' ^>^AjL)<3 

Cjt AA ^=Xa ^Ui/d ’$3* d£) X^3 <JL9 i 



A 5 \a^cA \j £j\^fi 


CA^-2^ ^ /%U Je>c^jJ^j(^) 

OS-^ lii-X^ilj^ AjA iJ^J 'A- (^)# Oj^U O^lA^J 

C^jli \ (3.U A4? (£) g C*33 -%r/^ i^\ii OJ^ 


«*» 


© I did not send before you - O Messenger - except 
men who were human beings, to whom I sent reve¬ 
lation. I did not send Messengers that were angels. 

This is Our constant practice. If you all deny that 
then ask the people of the previous scriptures and 
they will tell you that Messengers were only human 
beings. 

© We sent those Messengers from amongst hu¬ 
mans with clear signs and revealed scriptures. We 
have revealed to you, O Messenger, the Qur’an so 
that you can give people the explanation they re¬ 
quire and so that they can apply their minds and 
take a lesson from what it contains. 

© Do those who make plots to prevent people from 
Allah’s path feel secure that Allah will not cause the 
earth to cave in with them as He caused it to cave in 
with Qarun, or that the punishment will not come to 
them from where they least expect. 

© Or that the punishment will not afflict them 
whilst they are going about on their journeys and 
in their quest for earnings. They will not escape nor 
protect themselves from it. 

© Or do they feel secure that Allah’s punishment 
will not come to them while they are afraid of it? 

Allah is able to punish them in every condition. 

Your Lord is compassionate and merciful. He does 
not take retribution hastily for perhaps His servants 
will turn to Him in repentance. 

© Do these deniers not look with contemplation 
at His creation? Their shadows incline right and 
left following the movement of the sun in the day 
and that of the moon at night, in humility and pros¬ 
tration to their Lord, whilst they are submissive to 
Allah and are subject to His domination. 

© It is to Allah alone that all creatures in the heavens and on earth prostrate. It is to Him alone that the angels prostrate. 
They are not too proud to worship Allah and obey Him. 

© They - despite their constant worship and obedience - fear their Lord who is above them by His Self, Dominance and 
Authority and they carry out the acts of obedience that their Lord instructs them to. 

© Allah, may He be glorified, said to all His servants: Do not take two beings of worship. The being deserving of wor¬ 
ship is only one who has no second nor any partner. So fear Me only and do not fear others besides Me. 

© To Him alone belongs everything in the heavens and on earth: He created, owns and controls all of it. To Him alone 
obedience, submission and sincerity is due always. Will you, then, fear anyone other than Allah? No, instead fear Him 
alone! 

© Whatever blessing you - O people - have in this world or in the afterlife is from Allah, may He be glorified, and not 
from anyone else. Then when some calamity, sickness or poverty afflicts you, it is to Him alone that you plead in sup¬ 
plication to remove what has afflicted you. Thus, the One who grants blessings and who removes difficulties is the One 
Who must be worshipped alone. 

© Then when He answers your prayer and removes the harm from you, a group of you begin associating partners with 
their Lord and worshipping others with Him. What unjust behaviour is this! 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The virtue of the people of knowledge, for Allah instructed those who do not know to refer to them in all incidents. 
This is an implicit attestation to their integrity and credibility as He instructed that they be asked. 2. A sinner should be 
ashamed of His Lord, that his sins ascend to Him, whilst Allah’s blessings descend on him all the time! 

3. The people of disbelief, denial and sin should be afraid that Allah may seize them with punishment while they are 
unaware. 4. All blessings are from Allah, whether these are material blessings such as sustenance, safety and health or 
intangible blessings such as security, prestige, position and the like. 5. Humans finds no refuge from difficulties except 
by calling on Allah, thus inevitably call on Him because they knows that no one can remove difficulties except Him. 








Al-Nahl 272~ 





















;^Lj£^\jU> OjJAjo^Q 


9 AjJ*0>^<J 






3 -^55 jA->J Jo ^1 

^Jj\ J Cxt^r^ ^ 4&\ J*Zr)y$J& 

43^ L (^) ^cK^JJ 


I 


I 


j ^-r ^ 


© Their associating partners with Allah meant that 
they in fact reject Allah’s favours to them, includ¬ 
ing Allah saving them from their distress after they 
had called on Him alone. It was therefore said to 
them: Enjoy the luxuries that you have until Allah’s 
penalty comes to you sooner or later. 

© The idolaters allocate to their idols, which do not 
know anything - as they are lifeless objects that can 
neither benefit nor harm - a portion of the wealth 
that We provided for them, as a means of seeking 
closeness to those idols. By Allah, you - O idolaters 
- will be questioned on the Day of Judgement about 
your assertions that these idols are Allahs and that 
they are entitled to a portion of your wealth. 

© The idolaters attribute daughters to Allah and 
they believe that these are the angels. Thus they 
attribute lineage to Allah and select for him what 
they do not like for themselves. He is Pure, Glori¬ 
fied and Sanctified from what they assign to Him. 
They assign for themselves the male offspring that 
they desire. What crime is greater than this?! 

© When one of these idolaters is given the news 
of the birth of a female his face darkens due to the 
extreme dislike of such news and his heart is filled 
with worry and grief. Then, he attributes to Allah 
what he does not like for himself! 

© He hides from his people because of the bad 
news of the birth of a girl that was given to him. 
He asks himself: Shall he keep this girl that he was 
given news of with humiliation and dejection, or 
shall he bury her alive and hide her in the dust? 
How evil is the decision that the idolaters make 
when they assigned to their Lord what they detest 
for themselves. © It is those who do not believe in the Hereafter who have a lower description; such as ignorance, dis¬ 
belief, as well as the need to have offspring. Allah has the praiseworthy attributes of majesty, perfection, independence 
and knowledge. He, may He be glorified, is Mighty in His kingdom and nothing can overcome Him. He is Wise in His 
creation, planning and legislation. © If Allah, may He be glorified, were to punish mankind for their injustices and for 
their rejection of Him, He would not leave on earth a single human being or animal that walks on its surface. But He, 
may He be glorified, postpones them until a time that is fixed in His knowledge. Then, when that time that is fixed in His 
knowledge comes, they will not delay it nor will they advance it for even a short while. © They assign to Allah, may He 
be glorified, females that they dislike to attribute to themselves. They claim falsely that if indeed they are resurrected then 
they will have the best ranks with Allah. Truly, for them is the Fire, and they will be left therein never to come out of it. 
© By Allah, We sent Messengers to communities before you - O Messenger, but Satan made their evil deeds of idolatry, 
disbelief and sins seem good to them. He is their so-called helper on the Day of Judgement so let them ask him for help. 
They will have a painful punishment of the Day of Judgement. © We did not reveal the Qur’an to you, O Messenger, 
except for you to make clear to all people what they differ about in respect of Allah’s oneness, resurrection and the details 
of the sacred law, and for the Qur’an to be a guidance and mercy for those who have faith in Allah, His Messengers and 
all what the Qur’an came with, for they are the ones who will truly benefit. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Some of the errors of the idolaters are the attribution of daughters to Allah and the attribution of sons to themselves 
and their disdain of daughters. Their faces display grief and sorrow at the birth of a female and they hide from and avoid 
contact with people because of the extreme grief, humiliation and shame on account of having a daughter. 2. It is Allah’s 
practice to give respite to the disbelievers and not to punish them immediately to give them an opportunity to have faith 
and repent. 3. The time of a person’s death and the end of his life will not come earlier or later by even one hour or 
moment. 4. Allah’s practice amongst His servants is to send Messengers with clear proofs and a full explanation. Mu¬ 
hammad (peace be upon him) is therefore like other Messengers. 5. The major task of the Prophet (peace be upon him) is 
to explain what is contained in the Qur’an and to clarify what the people of the various creeds and beliefs differed about 
with respect to religion and sacred laws, so that his clarification can be a proof against them. 


^ J 9 J S'JX'C s Sfs . ? 9 f .If 


Al-Nahl 


273 





















Vi 




cfej^ ^ ^ l^AsvV* ^LkJii \ ( j^. <Jy \ iliV^ j 
^C.a.7^ '^Sy<4j^ <ii^i 

Vj^^,V2- oJ-3 cjlS-A 

\5d~b=^ I 

,\&x^ \ l\\ So ) < i^Vu ^ ^tsi sy^> l V;\_ix^>- 


|VE 


0C0 

0^ 1 ^j~i ^jj^sL- {^) CJj^j&i 

I O ^ 0 2 *P ,0 ^ ^ ^ ^ *** *0 






IJjtS^y. 


@ Allah sends down rain from the direction of the 
sky, with which He revives the earth by taking out 
vegetation from it after it had been dry and arid. In 
the sending down of the rain from the direction of 
the sky and in the taking out of the earth’s vegeta¬ 
tion by means of it, is a clear sign of Allah’s pow¬ 
er for people who listen to the words of Allah and 
ponder over them. 

{§5 There is a lesson for you to take - O people - in 
camels, cows and goats: We give you to drink from 
their udders milk that comes out from in between 
the waste that the stomach contains and the blood 
that is in the body. Despite this it comes out as pure 
milk that is tasty and pleasant to those who drink it. 

@ There is a lesson for you in the provision We 
give you from the fruits of date palms and grapes. 

From them you make intoxicants that affect the 
mind, which are not good, and you also take from 
them a good provision that is of benefit to you such 
as dates, raisins, vinegar and trickle. In this there 
truly is a sign of Allah’s power and favour to His 
servants for people who use their reason, for they 
are the ones who take heed. 
j§tS> Your Lord, O Messenger, inspired the bees and 
guided them saying, “Make homes for yourselves 
in the mountains, in the trees and in the structures 
and shelters that people build.” 

@ “Then eat of all the fruits you desire, and go 
along the pathways that your Lord inspires you to 
take that are made easy for you.” From the bellies 
of those bees emerges honey of different colours, 
such as white, yellow and other colours, which con¬ 
tains a cure for people that they can use to treat their 
sick. Surely in such inspiring of bees and in the honey that emerges from their bellies is a sign of Allah’s power and 
planning of the affairs of His creation for people who reflect, for they are the ones who take heed. 

Allah created you without a precedent; then He will cause you to die when your term of life ends. The lifespan of 
some of you will be extended to the worst stage of life, which is the severe old-age, when a person will no longer know 
anything of what he used to know. Allah is knowing, and no action of His servants is hidden from Him. He is powerful 
and nothing can overpower Him. 

@ Allah, may He be glorified, has given some of you preference over others in the provision that He has granted you 
and has made some you some of you rich and others poor, some of you leaders and others subjects. Those whom Allah 
has given preference in provision are not willing to pass on what Allah has given them to their servants, so that they 
become equal partners in the ownership thereof. How then are they pleased for Allah to have partners from amongst His 
servants when they are not pleased for themselves to have partners from amongst their servants who are equal to them? 
What injustice is this and what rejection of Allah’s favours can be worse than this?! @ Allah has made for you - O 
people - spouses from your species whose company you can enjoy. He has made for you from your spouses children and 
grandchildren; and has provided you with wholesome foods such as meat, grains and fruit. Will they then believe in false 
idols and statues, and reject Allah’s innumerable favours and not thank Him by having faith in Him alone?! 

Beneficial Points: 

1. Allah has kept for His servants in the fruit of the date-palm and grapes many benefits and advantages such as the good 
provision that the servants can consume fresh and ripe in the present or the future in the form of food or drink. 2. In the 
creation of tiny bees and the delicious honey that comes out of their bellies with different colours in accordance with the 
various lands and pastures there is a sign of Allah’s complete care and kindness for His servants and that no one besides 
Him should be divinely loved and called on in worship. 3. One of the great favours of Allah to His servants is that He 
made for them spouses that they could find comfort in and He made from their spouses children who are the coolness of 
their eyes, who serve them and fulfil their needs and from whom they can benefit in numerous ways. 4. In the verses there 
is an indication towards the permissibility of utilising milk for drinking and other purposes. 5. In the bee there are many 
benefits for the trees and plants themselves and for man as well. Likewise in honey there are benefits and a cure for man. 


0^>i=====d 5^ 


Al-Nahl 


274 

















U 4$ Oj J ^ jj 

JVf^S \ ^J\y^ 2 > (^} \iL22 cr£)$)j 

^4^\f^\JU, ^kjj cytj ij'^JurJ 1 ^===^Ll* 

^iSshS^ il* 

^-i-* ^n^3 ($) ^J^====^ 

jt^=L >3 

J^l4 CS*jy* <^y^i 

44-^ Mj 0 <JaJj3\j 

0 J^>s><j^ 



These idolaters worship, besides Allah, idols 
who have no power to provide them with any pro¬ 
vision from the heavens or the earth and they will 
never be able to do so because they are inanimate 
objects that have no life or knowledge. 

@ So - O People - do not make similarities for Al¬ 
lah from these idols that do not benefit nor harm. 
Allah has no likeness that you can associate with 
Him in worship. Allah knows the attributes of maj¬ 
esty and perfection that are His and you do not 
know that and as a result you ascribe partners to 
Him and claim that your idols are similar to Him. 
@ Allah, may He be glorified, strikes an example 
to refute the idolaters: A bonded slave that is una¬ 
ble to do anything and who has nothing to spend as 
compared to a free person to whom We have given 
from our side lawful wealth that he uses as he wills 
and spends from it secretly and openly as he wills. 
These two men are not equal. How then do you 
make Allah who is the Owner of everything, who 
spends in His dominion and does what He wills, 
equal to those powerless idols? Praise be to Allah 
Who is deserving of all praise. Rather, most of the 
idolaters do not know that Allah is Single in His di¬ 
vinity and that He alone deserves to be worshipped. 
@ Allah, may He be glorified, strikes another ex¬ 
ample to refute them, which is the example of two 
men: One of them is mute and cannot hear, speak 
or understand due to his deafness and muteness. He 
is unable to benefit himself or others. He is a heavy 
burden on the one who is in charge of and looks 
after him. Whichever direction he sends him, he 
brings no good and does not attain the objective. 
Can the person whose condition is like this be equal to one who is sound of hearing and speech, and who is of benefit to 
others. He instructs people to be just and he himself is upright. He is on a clear path that has no confusion or crookedness. 
How then do you - O idolater- equate Allah Who possesses the attributes of majesty and perfection with your idols who 
cannot hear or speak and who cannot bring any benefit or remove any harm?! 

@ To Allah alone belongs the knowledge of the unseen of the heavens and knowledge of the unseen of the earth. He has 
the exclusive knowledge of that as opposed to anyone of His creation. The coming of the Hour is only known to Allah, 
and the speed of its coming is only like the closing and opening of the eyelid or closer then that. Allah has power over 
everything. Nothing can overpower Him. When He intends something He says, “Be” and it is. 

{j| Allah brought you - O people - out of your mothers’ wombs after the completion of the term of pregnancy, as babies 
not realising anything; and He gave you hearing to hear with, eyesight to see with, and hearts to reason; in the hope that 
you may give thanks to Him for these favours that He has given you. 

@ Have the idolaters not seen the birds that are subdued and designed to fly in the air because of the wings that Allah 
granted them along with the lighteness and delicate nature of the air? He inspired them to close and open their wings. 
No one keeps them from falling in the air except Allah, the Powerful. In this subjugation and holding them from falling 
there are signs for people who have faith in Allah, because they are the ones who benefit from such signs and lessons. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Allah has kept great wisdom in the distribution of sustenance amongst His servants. He has made some of them rich, 
some poor and others middle-class, so that the world can be complementary and people can live with one another by serv¬ 
ing one another. 2. The two examples in the verses show the deviation of the idolaters and the falsehood of the worship 
of idols, because the deity that deserves to be worshipped is the one that has control and power to do things, to benefit 
those who worship Him, and to instruct goodness and justice. 3. The knowledge of the Ghaib in the heavens and earth 
is exclusive to Allah. No one knows it except a prophet or angel to whom Allah gives knowledge thereof. 4. One of the 
favours of Allah and a display of His power, is the creation of human beings in the wombs of their mothers in a state of 
not knowing anything. Then He provides them with the means of realisation and knowledge, which is their hearing, sight 
and hearts, by which they come to know and understand. 


| 0 ‘4^ l|<iA 4ji\ ^ 


Al-Nahl 


275 






















@ Allah, may He be glorified, has made for you 
the homes that you build out of stone and other 
items to settle and rest therein. He has made for 
you, from the skins of camels, cows and goats, 
tents and canopies in the desert that are similar to 
urban homes. These are light for you to carry when 
you travel from one place to another and are easy 
to erect when you stop. He has made for you, from 
the wool of sheep and the hair of camels and goats, 
furnishings for your homes and garments and cov¬ 
erings that you can enjoy the use of until a specified 
time. 

@ Allah has made for you trees and buildings that 
you use as shade from the heat. He has made for 
you tunnels, caverns and caves in the mountains 
that you use as a cover from the cold, heat and from 
enemies. He has made for you shirts and clothing 
of cotton that protect you from the heat and cold. 

He has made for you armour that protect you from 
the violence of others in war so that the weapons do 
not penetrate and reach your bodies. Just as Allah 
has given you the above favours He completes His 
favours to you in the hope that you will submit to 
Allah alone and not associate anything as partner 
to Him. 

@ If they turn away from faith and acceptance of 
what you have brought, then your duty, O Messen¬ 
ger, is only to convey what you have been instruct¬ 
ed to in a clear manner. It is not your duty to make 
them accept guidance. 

@) The idolaters recognise the favours that Allah 
has given them, such as the sending of the prophet 
(peace be upon him), but then they deny His fa¬ 
vours by not giving thanks and by rejecting His Messenger. Most of them reject His favours, may He be glorified, 
(jp Remember, O Messenger, the Day when Allah will raise up from every nation their Messenger who was sent to them 
to give testimony of the faith of those who believed and the rejection of those who disbelieved. Thereafter those who 
disbelieved will not be allowed to present an excuse for their rejection and they will not be returned to the world to do 
actions pleasing to their Lord, as the afterlife is the place of reckoning and not the place of action. 

@ When the wrongdoers and idolaters will see the punishment, it will not be lightened for them and they will not be 
given respite by it being delayed from them. Instead, they will enter it to live in it forever. 

jjj) When the idolaters in the afterlife will see the false deities that they used to worship besides Allah, they will say: “O 
our Lord! These are our partners that we used to worship besides You.” They will say this to make them carry their bur¬ 
dens. Allah will cause their deities to speak and they will respond to them saying: You - O idolaters - were false in your 
worship of a partner with Allah, for He has no partner deserving of worship. 

@ The idolaters will surrender and submit to Allah alone and all their fabricated claims that their idols will intercede for 
them before Allah will disappear. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The abundance of favours is a reason that draws the servants to an increase in gratitude and praise for Allah. 

2. The condition of those who disbelieved in Allah on the Day of Judgement is that no excuse will be accepted from 
them, the retribution will not be removed from them, their partners will abandon them and they will acknowledge that 
they were guilty of disbelief. 

3. The witness that will give testimony against every nation will be the purest and most just witness. These are the Mes¬ 
sengers on whose testimony judgement will be passed. 

4. The verses indicate the permissiblity of using wool and animal hair in all conditions. 

5. One of Allah’s favours to His servants that is deserving of gratitude: Are the homes we live in and enjoy. 

6. In the verse: “garments to protect you from your violence” there is an indication that the servants must make prepara¬ 
tions of equipment for striving in Allah’s path so that they can be used when fighting the enemy. 



















1 late 

l|cu^ J^j($) &J<J\x^\ l3}2 

2j^\^y^ == 3 

ai, \ ^Li' l£ ***4 9 A^±~>zlJ <S^J*J 

I^}\ 


Jje' 


\\j^l^J^lj JLj -k-glp\i^4J^ J^aO ( g ) 

>- J^jVjfe Jk^==^ -Oo 




C^2A) 


Cai (^J —^\w^y^_So^j^ \ 



<0 Those who disbelieved and turned others away 
from the Religion of Allah will have their punish¬ 
ment increased above and beyond what was due 
to them from their own disbelief, but because they 
misguiding others also. 

(j| Remember, O Messenger, the day when we will 
raise in every nation a Messenger who will testi¬ 
fy against them about their denial or their accept¬ 
ance of faith. This Messenger will be from their 
ownselves and will speak their language. We have 
brought you, O Messenger, as a witness against all 
communities. We revealed the Qur’an to you to 
clarify everything that requires clarification such 
as the lawful and unlawful, reward and punishment 
etc. We also revealed it as a guidance for people 
to the truth, as a mercy to those who have faith in 
it and practice what it contains, and as good news 
for those who have faith in Allah of the everlasting 
bliss that awaits them. 

@) Allah instructs His servants to be just, by dis¬ 
charging Allah’s rights and the rights of fellow hu¬ 
man beings and by not giving preference in judge¬ 
ment to anyone unless with a right that demands 
such preference. He instructs them to be good, by 
doing more than what is mandatory such as spend- 
IH* ing voluntarily and forgiving the oppressor. He in¬ 
structs them to see to the needs of their relatives. 
He forbids everything that is vile, in words, such 
as obscene speech, or in deeds, such as fornication. 
He forbids oppression and arrogance over people. 
| Allah advises you with the instructions and prohi¬ 
bitions in this verse in the hope that you will take 
heed of His advice. 

@ Fulfil every pledge that you made to Allah or that you made to people. Do not break oaths after making them binding 
by swearing by Allah, when you have made Allah a witness to the oath that you swore. Allah knows what you do. Nothing 
is hidden from Him and He will recompense you for that. 

Do not be, by breaking your oaths, foolish and dim-witted like a woman who tired herself by spinning her wool and 
after it was firmly spun she broke it open and unravelled it!. She tired herself by spinning it and then breaking it and she 
didnt obtain the desired result. You make your oaths as a means of deception to deceive one another, so that your nation 
can be more in number and stronger than the nation of your enemies. Allah only tests you by the fulfilment of your oaths 
- will you fulfil them or break them? Allah will make clear to you on the Day of Judgement those things you differed 
about in the world and He will distinguish those who were on truth from those who were on falsehood and the truthful 
from the liars. 

{JjS) Had Allah willed, He would have made you one nation in agreement on the truth, but He, may He be glorified, mis¬ 
guides whom He wills from the truth and from fulfilling their oaths by His justice, and He guides whom He wills to do so 
by His grace. You will surely be questioned on the Day of Judgement about what you used to do in the world. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The disbelievers who prevent others from Allah’s path will receive multiplied punishment on account of their spread¬ 
ing corruption in the world by their disbelief and sin. 

2. The earth is not without people of righteousness and knowledge. They are the leaders of guidance and representatives 
of the prophets. The scholars are the guardians of the sacred law of the prophets. 

3. The verses have defined the pillars of Muslim society in the private and public life of the individual, the community 
and the state. 

4. The necessity of fulfilling pledges and covenants and the prohibition of breaking them. 

5. The prohibition of bribery and acceptance of money for breaking one’s pledge. 





Al-Nahl 





























Do not make your oaths a means of deception 
thereby allowing you to trick and deceive one an¬ 
other, following your desires - breaking them when¬ 
ever you wish and fulfilling them when you wish. If 
you do so your feet will slip from the straight path 
after being firm on it. You will taste the punishment 
on account of your deviation from Allah’s path and 
your misleading others from it and you will receive 
multiplied punishment. 

@ Do not exchange the oath you took in Allah’s 
name for a small amount, not fulfilling the pledge 
or not being sincere in it. The victory and booty 
that Allah has in the world and the perpetual bliss 
that He has in the afterlife is better for you than the 
small amount that you take for breaking the pledge, 
if only you knew that. 

{§P> The wealth, pleasures and luxuries that you 
have - O people - will come to an end no matter 
how much it may be, but the reward that is with 
Allah will remain. How then do you give prefer¬ 
ence to that which is perishable over that which is 
lasting? We will certainly reward those who remain 
steadfast on their oaths and who do not break them 
according to the best of their good deeds by multi¬ 
plying its reward by ten times up to seven hundred 
times or even more. 

@ Whoever does good deeds in accordance with 
the sacred law, whether male or female, while hav¬ 
ing faith in Allah, We will grant them in this world 
a good life, by their being pleased with Allah’s de¬ 
cree, content and guided towards righteous actions, 
and We will reward them in the afterlife in accord¬ 
ance with the best good deeds that they used to do 
in the world. 

jj§) When you intend to recite the Qur’an - O believer - then ask Allah to protect you from the whispering of the Satan, 
who is rejected from Allah’s mercy. @ Satan has no authority over those who have faith in Allah and who rely only on 
their Lord in all their affairs. |f| He only has authority by means of His whispering over those who take him as an ally 
and follow him in his luring and those who because of such luring associate partners with Allah whom they worship along 
with Him. |f| When We abrogate the ruling of one verse of the Qur’an with another verse - and Allah knows well about 
the part of the Qur’an that is abrogated for a reason and the part that is not abrogated - they say: You, O Muhammad, are 
only a liar making up things about Allah. Rather, most of them do not know that abrogation occurs for a divine reason 
with far-reaching wisdom. |f| Say to them, O Messenger, This Qur’an has been brought down by Gabriel (peace be with 
him) from Allah, may He be glorified, with the truth that contains no error, alteration or distortion, to keep those who have 
faith in Allah firm on their faith, whether a new part is revealed or a part is abrogated, and to be a guidance for them to 
the truth and good news for the Muslims about the generous reward that they will obtain. 

Beneficial Points: 

1. The person who gives preference to that which is despicable and perishable over that which is valuable and lasting is 
not intelligent. 2. Good action accompanied by faith makes life pleasant. 

3. The need to abstain from that which is harmful to a person; that which causes him to become unmindful of Allah’s 
rights and what Allah has made obligatory on him. 4. The path to safety from the evil of Satan is to resort to Allah and 
to seek His protection. 5. The believers must make the Qur’an their leader and be guided by the knowledge it contains, 
adopt its ethics and use its light. In this way both their religious and worldly affairs will be set right. 6. Seeking Allah’s 
protection from Satan, the rejected, is required when commencing with the recitation of the Qur’an, whether in the ritual 
prayer or outside of it. This is so that Satan cannot interfere with the reciter by his whisperings and prevent him from 
reflecting over the Qur’an and practicing its teachings. 7. Satan has no authority and power whatsoever to mislead into 
disbelief those believers who have faith in Allah and His Messenger, because Allah has taken away his power over them. 
8. Abrogation of verses occured in the Qur’an during the period of its revelation for reasons, such as; to take into account 
overall interests, events, and changing circumstances. 


^ 

10 ' 



















A J 


I 4J ^<^ 6)0! 

C>-\£=<]\ <^JC^6LS)0jLi) | 

( 0 ) CL>y.-££=k \ -6.663 V? 6 >\ c6?%66j63j.6 | 
/S>jt^ &§t A. 



|p I know very well that the idolaters say: It is a 
human being who is teaching Muhammad (peace 
j3&j |£ h be upon him). They are lying in this claim of theirs. 
^ ^ ** \ ^ gj^ The language of the person whom they assume is 

teaching him is non-Arabic, whereas this Qur’an 
has been revealed in the clear and highly eloquent 
Arabic language. How then do they claim that he 
received it from a non-Arab?! 

(jf| Those who do not believe that the verses of the 
Qur’an are in fact from Allah, may He be glorified, 
Allah does not bless them with guidance as long 
as they persist in that. They will receive a painful 
punishment on account of their rejection of Allah 
and denial of His verses. 

HI Muhammad (peace be upon him) is not lying 
about what he brought from His Lord. Lies are only 
being invented by those who do not accept Allah’s 
words, because they do not fear any punishment 
nor have hope of any reward. Those described with 
the attribute of disbelief are the liars as lying is a 
habit that they are accustomed to. 

(j|| Whoever denies Allah after having faith in Him 
is in one of two situations: His denial is by means 
of a statement or action that he was coerced to make 
or do, whilst his heart is firm on his faith. This per¬ 
son is a believer. The second situation is when the 
person is content with and comfortable with such 
denial. Such a person and others like him are apos¬ 
tates from Islam, the anger of Allah is on them and 
in the afterlife they will receive a great punishment. 
(§) Such apostasy from Islam is because they gave 
preference to the trivial things of this world as a 
benefit for their disbelief in the Hearafter and be¬ 
cause Allah does not guide to faith people who disbelieve, but He abandons them. 

@) Those described as being apostates after having faith are the ones whose hearts Allah has sealed, so they do not un¬ 
derstand the admonition, He has sealed their hearing, so that they do not hear anything that benefits them, and He has 
sealed their sight, so that they do not see the signs indicating faith. It is they who are unaware of the causes of happiness 
and wretchedness and of the punishment that Allah has prepared for them. 

HI Truly it is they who will be the losers on the Day of Judgement, for they have lost their own souls on account of their 
disbelief after faith. Had they held onto their faith they would have entered paradise. 

Then your Lord - O Messenger - is Forgiving and Merciful towards those oppressed believers who migrated from 
Makkah to Madina after being persecuted by the idolaters to the extent that they uttered words of disbelief whilst their 
hearts were at peace with faith. Then they strove in Allah’s path to make the Word of Allah supreme, and the word of the 
disbelievers lowest and they were patient over its difficulties. Your Lord, after the persecution that they underwent, is 
Forgiving and Merciful towards them because they only uttered words of disbelief under duress. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Concession is granted to a person under duress to utter words of disbelief whilst his heart is at peace with faith. 

2. The severe consequences for those who leave the religion in both worlds. 

3. Apostates are deserving of Allah’s anger and punishment because they preferred the life of the world over the afterlife 
and they are deprived of Allah’s guidance. Allah has sealed their hearts, hearing and sight and they have been made heed¬ 
less of the severe punishment that will await them on the Day of Judgement. 

4. Allah has written forgiveness and mercy for those who have faith, who migrated after being persecuted and who were 
patient in striving in Allah’s path. 


36-6-6 0 \ ^1—& J 

0 \Jdi' 















J Vjk | 


TA-j 



^kS^ 4j^ ^r^?J ( ^) ^L> $ euL^l^ ^juJl? 

1^\ ^ ^Nj l ^ ,p\ ^ a\ ^\o^aa *'^^J**A^—=> ^ jfj* 

ij^\^Ja^\ aj^\ ^io\j c£JJ2-£===l2 o^6^ 

Ju^ ("£) 1^=^ li-j <Jjt 


gjsl* 

vJ4r' 



@ Remember - O Messenger - the Day when every 
person will come arguing for himself. He will not 
argue for anyone else due to the magnitude of the 
situation. Every soul will be given in full the rec¬ 
ompense for what it had done, whether good or bad, 
and they will not be wronged by any subtraction 
from their good actions or addition to their evil ac¬ 
tions. 

|!| Allah cites the example of a town - which is 
Makkah - that was secure and stable with its peo¬ 
ple having no fear, whilst people around it lived 
in fear. Its sustenance comes to it abundantly and 
easily from every direction. But then its people be¬ 
came unappreciative of Allah’s blessings to them 
and they did not thank Him, so Allah recompensed 
them with hunger and intense fear that was visible 
in the panic on their faces and emaciation in their 
bodies to the extent that this became like a garment 
for them on account of the disbelief and denial that 
they used to do. 

And a Messenger from among them, whose hon¬ 
esty and truthfulness they knew - who was Muham¬ 
mad (peace be upon him) - had come to the people 
of Makka, but they denounced him along with what 
Allah had revealed to him. As a result, Allah’s pun¬ 
ishment of hunger and fear came on them whilst 
they were wronging their own souls by associating 
partners with Allah and rejecting His Messenger. 

|1| So eat - O people - of the lawful and wholesome 
things that Allah, may He be glorified, has provided 
for you, and be thankful for the blessings Allah has 
given you by acknowledging these blessings of His 
and using them to seek His pleasure, if it is Him 
that you worship alone without associating partners with Him. 

@ Allah has made unlawful for you to consume that which died without being slaughtered according to the sacred law, 
blood that spills forth from an animal at the time of slaughter, all parts of the pig, and what was slaughtered by a person as 
an offering to other than Allah. This prohibition applies at the time when a person has a choice.If someone is compelled 
to eat any of these forbidden types, and does so without desiring the forbidden thing itself and without going beyond the 
limit of what is necessary, then they have done no wrong. Allah is Forgiving and will forgive them for what they consume. 
He is Merciful in that He permitted that when it is necessary. 

Do not say - O idolaters - about the lies that you say about Allah’s laws: This thing is lawful and this thing is unlawful, 
in order to invent lies and attribute them to Allah with respect to making unlawful what He did not make unlawful, or 
making lawful what He did not make lawful. Those who invent lies about Allah will not succeed in attaining their objec¬ 
tive and they will not be saved from what they fear. 

@ They will have a brief and insignificant enjoyment by following their desires in the world and on the Day of Judgment 
they will receive a painful punishment. 

After Allah mentioned the food items that He made unlawful for this nation He then mentioned what He had made un¬ 
lawful for the Jews and said: 

(ff| I had made unlawful for the Jews in particular what I had told you about (in versel46 of Surah Al-An’am). I did not 
wrong them by making that unlawful, but they wronged themselves when they committed the causes for retribution. I 
thus recompensed them for their transgression and I made that unlawful for them as a punishment. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Allah has only made impure things unlawful for us out of His grace to protect us from filth. 2. The necessity of having 
faith in Allah and the Messengers, of worshipping Allah alone, of thanking Him for His numerous favours and blessings 
and that divine punishment will afflict every person who denies Allah and goes against Him and who rejects Allah’s 
favours to him. 3. The recompense corresponds to the act. When the people of the town rejected the favour, they were 
given the opposite instead, which was the elimination and withdrawal of the favour. They then fell into extreme hunger 
after satiation, and into fear and panic after security and comfort, and into a lack of resources after sufficiency. 


^ ^ 1-XI-XlA 

j ^ <4>\ | 


Al-Nahl 


280 

















@ Then your Lord - O Messenger - towards those 
who do evil deeds out of ignorance of the conse¬ 
quences, even though they do so deliberately, and 
then they repent to Allah after having done those 
evil deeds and they make amends to their actions 
in which there was corruption, your Lord, after 
repentance, forgives their sins and is merciful to 
them. Since the idolaters claimed that they were 
following the creed of Abraham, Allah refuted 
this claim of theirs and said: (J§| Indeed, Abraham 
(peace be upon him) possessed all the attributes 
of goodness and always obeyed His Lord turning 
away from all other religions to the religion of Sub¬ 
mission (Islam). He was never an idolater. ||| He 
was thankful for the favours that Allah had given 
him. Allah had selected Him to be a prophet and 
had guided him to the true religion of Islam. (jl|) I 
gave him in this world prophethood, praiseworthy 
mention and pious children. In the afterlife he will 
be from the righteous for whom Allah has prepared 
the highest ranks in paradise. (jl| Then we revealed 
to you - O Messenger - “Follow the creed of Abra¬ 
ham in terms of monotheism, freedom from the 
idolaters, calling towards Allah and practicing His 
sacred law, turning away from all other religions to 
the religion of Islam. He was never an idolater as 
the idolaters claim but he was a man of pure mon¬ 
otheism.” H| Reverence of the Sabbath was only 
made obligatory on the Jews who differed about it, 
so that they could free themselves on that day from 
their occupations for the sake of worship. This was 
after they had strayed from the day of Friday in 
which they were instructed to free themselves. Your 
Lord - O Messenger - will judge between these peo¬ 
ple who differ on the Day of Judgment about what they used to differ in and He will recompense each person with what 
they deserve. |I| Invite - O Messenger - to the religion of Islam, you and the believers who follow you, in a manner that 
is appropriate for the condition, understanding and mindset of the person who you are inviting and with admonition that 
contains encouragement and caution. Argue with them in the manner that is best in terms of speech, thought and polite¬ 
ness, for it is not your duty to guide people. You are only required to convey the message to them. Your Lord knows best 
who has strayed from the religion of Islam and He knows best those who are rightly guided to it, so do not lose yourself 
in grief over them. |l| If you want to retaliate against your enemy then retaliate to the same degree that they harmed 
you and not more. But if you are patient and do not retaliate despite having the ability to do so, then that is better for the 
patient amongst you than taking revenge by retaliating against them, (jp So be patient - O Messenger - over the harm 
that they afflict on you. You are only granted the ability to be patient by Allah’s granting it to you. Do not grieve over the 
disbelievers’ turning away from you, and do not let your heart be constrained by the schemes and plots they carry out. 
Allah is with those who are mindful of Him by leaving out sin and those who are good by doings acts of obedience and 
by fulfilling what they have been instructed to do. Allah’s help and support is with them. 

® Beneficial Points: 1. The permissibility of what is lawful and pure and not harmful and the prohibition of what is 
impure and harmful that leads to harm. All this also requires being thankful for the favour. 2. There are four main things 
that are unlawful to consume in the sacred law: These are carrion, blood, pork and animals sacrificed for other than 
Allah such as the idols. 3. In the case of necessity, when it is most likely that abstention will lead to loss of life, it is 
permitted to consume something that is prohibited. 4. The believers are warned against resembling the disbelievers in 
making lawful the unlawful and declaring the lawful unlawful without evidence from the sacred law. 5. The mercy of 
Allah demands that He accepts the repentance of His servants who do wrong such as disbelief and sins and then repent 
and reform their actions, and as a result Allah forgives them. 6. It is good for a Muslim to take Abraham (peace be upon 
him) as a role model. 7. Those inviting others to Allah’s religion must follow these three methods: Wisdom, effective 
counsel, and debate in the best manner. 8. Retaliation is only allowed to be carried out to the same extent to that which 
one was harmed. Thus an oppressed person is prohibited from increasing the reprisal against the oppressor. 9. In cases of 
life for life retaliation the law requires that the act is done in the same manner as the one who was killed-i.e. if a person 
used a sharp instrument or a stone to murder someone he may be killed with the same or similar object in the same way. 






















The Ascension (Surah Al-Isra) 


® Topic of the Surah 

This surah focuses on the perfection of the prophet¬ 
ic message of Mohammed (peace be upon him). 
The surah also contains indications and glad tidings 
of the mission being guaranteed and having a fu¬ 
ture. 

4*} Explanation: 

0) Allah, may He be glorified, is exalted from 
everything not appropriate for him. It is He who 
took His servant, Mohammad (peace be upon 
him), on the night journey from the sacred masjid 
(mosque), in Makkah, to the masjid of Jerusalem, 
whose surroundings I have blessed with fruit, crops 
and dwellings of prophets (peace be upon them), 
For him to see some of our signs which show Al¬ 
lah’s power and ability, may He be glorified. He is 
the One Who hears everything, no sound escapes 
Him, and the One who sees evrything, nothing 
is hidden from Him, and the One who sees from 



ad jCjo 


' (3. l) X*2e& \ yj 


whom nothing seen is hidden. ^ $ ^ j> jr > ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ 

I gave Moses (peace be upon him) the Torah ' >XS>J 

oio 



and I made it a guide and manual for the Israelites. 

I said to the Israelites: Do not take besides me any 
guardian to whom you entrust your affairs. Rather, 
place your reliance in Me alone. 

@ You are from the progeny of those I had fa¬ 
voured with salvation together with Noah (peace be 
upon him) from drowning in the flood. So remem¬ 
ber this favour and thank Allah by worshipping and 
following Him alone. In this, follow the example of 
Noah for he was very thankful of Allah. 

CjS> I told the Israelites and I informed them in the Torah that definitely they will be guilty of corruption on earth by their 
sin and arrogance twice, and they will rise over people with injustice and oppression, transgressing the limits in their rise. 
© When the first corruption occurred, I set against them servants of Ours, possessing great might and power, who killed 
and displaced them. They ransacked their homes destroying everything they passed by. Allah’s promise of that definitely 
occurred. 

Then once again I gave you - O Israelites - the upper hand and dominance over those who were set against you when 
you repented to Allah, and I supplied you with wealth after your wealth had been looted, and children after your children 
were taken captive, and I made you a force more in number than your enemies. 

© If you do good actions - O Israelites - in the manner that is required of you, then the recompense of that will be to your 
benefit, for Allah is in no need of your actions. If you do bad actions the consequences of that will be to your detriment. 
Your good actions do not benefit Allah and nor do your bad actions harm Him. When the second corruption occurs I will 
set your enemies against you to humiliate you and make shame appear on your faces due to the various types of disgrace 
they will make you taste, and to enter Jerusalem and destroy it just as they entered and destroyed it the first time, and to 
completely ruin all the lands that they conquer. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The virtue of the Sacred Mosque and the Farthest Mosque. 

2. Explanation of the virtue of gratitude and following in the footsteps of those prophets and Messengers who were 
thankful. 

3. The benefit of doing good and remaining firm on following Allah returns to the person himself. Similarly the evil of 
doing bad actions and going against Allah’s instructions goes back to the person himself. 

4. It is from Allah’s wisdom and practice that He sends against those who do corruption people who will stop them from 
that, so that Allah’s wisdom of reformation is realised. 

5. A warning to this nation against committing sin, so that they are not afflicted by what the Israelites were afflicted by. 
Allah’s practice is the same and does not change. 



























| \ j 


ya r 



J QlsT \ j\ jic>4^ j?J^f O^ Vo]j 

SjA c-lsLt^j L ]ji \ cj )^'*' 




A 


J\ J ^ * . 9 s'~’\' * ^ V iTXM, “ M~wvnx». v/x iuo I 6 nvii«xvv 1 V 1 wyxx 

%. against himself, his children and his wealth when 
^ ^ ^ ^ o <v he is angry, just as he prays for good for himself. If 


(0) Perhaps your Lord - O Israelites - will have mer¬ 
cy on you after this severe reprisal if you repent 
to Him and do good actions. But if you revert to 
causing corruption a third time or more than that, I 
will revert to taking reprisals from you. I have made 
Hell a prison for the disbelievers, from which they 
will not find any release. 

{j) This Qur’an that is revealed to Muhammad 
(peace be on him) guides to the best way, which 
is the way of Islam, and it informs those who have 
faith in Allah and who do good deeds of something 
that will please them, which is that they will receive 
a great reward from Allah. 

{j| It informs those who do not have faith in the 
Day of Judgment of something that will distress 
them, which is that I have prepared for them a pain¬ 
ful punishment on the Day of Judgement. 

|p Man on account of his ignorance prays for evil 


we had to answer his prayer for evil he will be ru¬ 
ined and so will his children and his wealth. Human 
beings are naturally hasty and therefore may hastily 
bring on something that is harmful. 

|§p I have created the night and the day as two signs 
indicating Allah’s oneness and power, due to their 
differences in terms of being long or short, hot or 
I . ^ l\\^ 9 \ ^' ***<\' \*c\\\^ ^ Bps* cold. I made the night dark for the purpose of rest 

| lJJj-Ju J& ujfio and s j ee p an( j j ma( j e the day bright in which peo- 

Sfy^X- % Jo <2)b "p ^ Can SeC aiK * wor k ^ or li ve lihood. This was 

^ * >/ ^ so that by the alternation of day and night you can 

know the number of years and calculate the months, 
days and hours that you require. I have explained 




Al-Isra 


283 PartlT" 


everything in detail so that it may all become clear and the truthful can become distinguished from the liars. 

{jp For every person I have made the actions that proceed from him attached to him, like how a necklace is attached to the 
neck. They will not leave him until he is taken to account for them. On the Day of Judgement, I will bring out for him a 
book that contains every good or bad deed that he did, which he will find spread open before him. 

@ I will say to him on that day: O Man! Read your book and take an account of your soul for your deeds. You are enough 
to take an account of yourself on the Day of Judgement. 

@ Whoever is guided to faith, then the reward of his being guided is for his own good; and whoever goes astray, the 
punishment for his going astray is to his detriment. No soul carries the sin of another soul, nor do I ever punish a people 
until I establish proof against them by sending Messengers to them. 

{jP When I decided to destroy a town because of its wrongdoing, I instructed those who became reckless because of 
affluence, to obey Allah but they did not comply. And instead they disobeyed Him and transgressed, so the word of the 
decimating punishment became justified against them and I destroyed them completely. 

@ And we have destroyed many generations after Noah, such as the Ad and Thamud. Your Lord - O Messenger - is 
sufficient as a Knower and Seer of the sins of His servants. Nothing is hidden from Him and He will recompense them 
for the same. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Whoever follows the guidance of the Qur’an is the most perfect, most upright and most guided of people in all his 
affairs. 2. The Qur’an contains good news, warnings and the means by which the good news can be attained. 

3. Warning against praying for evil for one’s self or children. 4. The divergence of the night and day by increasing and 
decreasing and by their alternation, and the light of the day and darkness of the night, are all signs of Allah’s oneness and 
existence and His perfect knowledge and power. 5. The cycle of night and day makes us come to know the correspond¬ 
ing number of years, months and days. 6. The day is the appropriate time for work, action and going about on earth to 
earn a livelihood and obtain provision. 7. Every person’s deeds are fixed to him, whether good or bad, they are specifi 
and bound to him. 8. The verses affirm the principle of individual responsibility and Allah’s justice and mercy to His 
servants. 


















Cr*J 0£) \j*y>XA _AJ\21*>- 

^ $ 

e^>-^ (^) ]j^Ji^j^Jl^ 




=^t0\^fc a?j & 


Jj ^ 


{^5L^£> 

\j_j ilj^iJj Ji5oS \ <i\jj ^^5 -{^) 


vi4-i| 


v ^c>5^S U43 jls V^-4^5"25 cj I 

c^JL^ssd Ji 5 2 jls 2 )\ ^\ 2 - 




© Whoever desires, by his acts of goodness, the 
life of the world and does not have faith in the af¬ 
terlife nor pays any attention to it, I expedite for 
him the luxury that I want to give him, not what he 
wants. Then I have made for him Hell, where he 
will enter on the Day of Judgment to suffer from its 
heat, being condemned for his choosing the world 
and his denial of the Hearafter; banished from Al¬ 
lah’s mercy. 

© But whoever desires, by his acts of goodness, 
the reward of the Hereafter, and pursues it as it 
should be pursued, free of show and reputation, 
while he has faith in that which Allah has made 
faith obligatory; these people who have these at¬ 
tributes - their effort will be accepted by Allah and 
He will recompense them for it. 

© To both these groups - the sinners and the du¬ 
tiful - we freely extend the gift of your Lord - O 
Messenger. The gift of your Lord in the world is not 
withheld from anyone, whether sinner or dutiful. 

© O Messenger, reflect about how we favoured 
some over others in the world in respect of provi¬ 
sion and rank. Yet the Hereafter is greater in the dis¬ 
parity between the ranks of luxury than that of the 
world, and greater in favours, so a believer should 
be eager for that. 

© O servant! Do not set up another deity that you 
worship together with Allah, or you will become 
condemned in the sight of Allah and His righteous 
servants, and forsaken by Him. 

© Your Lord - O servant - has instructed and made 
obligatory that you worship none but Him, and He 
has instructed that you be good to your parents, es¬ 
pecially when they become old. If either of them or both of them reach old age with you, do not become annoyed with 
them by uttering words that indicate the same, do not scold them and do not be harsh when speaking to them, but say to 
them kind words that are soft and courteous. 

© Humble yourself before them in humility and out of compassion, and say: O My Lord, be merciful to them as they 
have brought me up in my childhood. 

© Your Lord - O People - knows best what is within you of the sincere devotion to Him in worship, acts of goodness and 
being dutiful to parents. If the intention in your acts of worship, treatment of your parents and other acts is righteous, then 
He, may He be glorified, is Forgiving towards those who frequently turn to Him in repentance. If anyone repents from 
his prior failure to be dutiful to his Lord or to his parents, Allah will forgive him. 

© O believer - give the relative his rights by keeping family ties, give to the poor and needy, and give the traveller who 
is stranded. Do not spend your wealth in sin or in a manner that is wasteful. 

© Those who spend their wealth in sin and those who are wasteful in their spending are the brothers of the devils, they 
follow their instructions of being wasteful and extravagant Satan is ever ungrateful towards His Lord, and he only does 
things that are sinful and only instructs that which displeases His Lord. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. A person should do the good that he can and intend to do what he cannot, so that he receives the rewards for all of that. 

2. Allah’s wisdom and mercy demands that both believers and disbelievers are given provision in the world. Thus His 
gifts is not withheld from anyone. 

3. Having favours in the world are not to be taken as an indication of Allah’s pleasure, because worldly pleasures may be 
attained despite the end result being Allah’s punishment. 

4. Being good to parents is an obligatory imposition. Allah paired being grateful to them with being grateful to Him due 
to its great virtue. 

5. Islam forbids wastefulness, which is to spend wealth in undeserving avenues. 


I ($) | 


Al-Isra 


284 

























S^>4|_U3 Vajp£? <i^j CjtJ^D *^*sA J*-4^u^y^ ^1? 

Jo AjJ£-^N( ^ ) \ jaJLi* 
3^\Jil3oci\jJ 6lQ^ '5o^>r^l^jvLs A* alft . U^ A\ ^ 
^» ^ll^O^^lj aa$j iLiA 

AAj A^Jls^T li 

t^tJ VjSi \]_jiiflj'3_j (^) ^L^ 

-Ca3 L^A> J^S A*J 

I oVi^K 

<ilS ^Ca^ La ^Jlflj ^jj i-*lV 3 

<3 ‘ 



@ But if you refrain from giving these people, due 
to not having anything to give them, while waiting 
for Allah to bless you with provision, then say to 
them gentle and polite words such as praying for 
them to have abundant provision or promising to 
give them if Allah grants you wealth. @ Do not 
withhold your hand from spending, and do not be 
wasteful when spending, if you do, you will be 
blameful amongst the people for your miserliness, 
or you will become uable to spend due to your ex¬ 
travagant expenditure. @ Your Lord expands the 
provision for whoever He wills, and restricts it for 
whoever He wills based on far-reaching wisdom. 
He is fully aware and observant of His servants. 
Nothing of theirs is hidden from Him, and He dis¬ 
poses of His matter with respect to them however 
He wills. @ Do not kill your children for fear of 
^ poverty in the future if you spend on them. I take 
" charge of providing for them, and for you too. Kill¬ 
ing them is a major sin, as they have done nothing 
wrong and there is no reason requiring them to be 
killed. (SjS Be careful of fornication and avoid things 
that prompt it. It is extremely detestable and bad 
path to traverse as it leads to the mixing of lineages 
and punishment from Allah. @) Do not kill the soul 
ft* whose life Allah has protected through faith or a 
pledge of security, except if the killing is merited on 
the basis of treason or legal retribution. If someone 
is killed unjustly, without a valid reason permitting 
his being killed, I have given his successor who 
takes charge of his affairs certain authority over the 
killer. He may demand that the killer be killed in 
retribution, or he may forgive him without asking 
for any thing in return, or he may forgive him and take the blood money. But he shall not mutilate the killer, or by killing 
him with something that he did not use to kill, or by killing someone other than the killer, even if he was a helper and sup¬ 
porter. @) Do not transact in the property of a child whose father has passed away, except in his best interests such as in¬ 
vesting or preserving it until he reaches the age of mental and prudential maturity. Fulfill any pledge between yourselves 
and Allah, or between yourselves and His servants, without breaking or falling short in them. Allah will question the one 
who made a pledge on the Day of Judgement. Did he fulfill it, in which case He will reward him, or did he not fulfil it, 
in which case He will punish him. @ Give full measure when you measure for others and do not cheat them. Weigh with 
an accurate scale that does not diminish or undervalue anything. That giving of full weight and measure is better for you 
in this world and the Hearafter, than giving short measure or weight. @ Do not follow - O son of Adam - that which you 
have no knowledge of, by following suspicions and conjecture. A person will be questioned about the good or bad that 
he used his hearing, sight and heart for and he will rewarded for the good and punished for the bad. @ Do not walk on 
earth with pride and arrogance. If you walk haughtily on earth you will not be able to split the earth, nor will your stature 
reach the mountains in height and elevation. Why then are you so proud?! The evil of all that has been mentioned 
above is prohibited by your Lord - O man! Allah is not pleased with those who perpetrate this and He in fact detests them. 
® Beneficial Points: 1. Noble conduct is to respond politely to relatives, to promise to give to them during times of pros¬ 
perity and to offer an acceptable excuse to them. 2. Spending that is deserving of praise is that which is moderate without 
stinginess or wastefulness. 3. Allah shows more mercy to children than their parents. He therefore prohibited parents 
from killing their children out of fear of poverty and He took on the responsiblity of providing for all of them. 4. The pro¬ 
hibition of coming close to fornication is more effective than the mere prohibition of the act itself, because that includes 
the prohibition of all things that lead to and prompt it. 5. In the verses there is evidence that the right to kill is that of the 
close relative and retribution cannot be taken without his consent. If he forgives any right to legal retribution is lifted. 

6. It is Allah’s grace and mercy to the orphan that He instructed his guardians to take care of him and his wealth and to 
do what is best for it and grow it until he reaches maturity. 7. The necessity for fairness and the just fulfilment of weight 
and measure without any reduction or decrease, so that blessings descend on the servant. 8. A person will be questioned 
about his statements and actions. 




Al-Isra 


285 


Part 15 


















j Y A1 

Cjt^ \JU* <ifc> 

0 \jJ>-Xa t^>^j. jj$&^\+ 

0 Xj^ss^y \ £/eJ \ j 

j 0]3>o^ l>-4>)2 

cg^£jA \ 2J ^L5 0 0 

oVp \ 3^ 0 V3y^\^J^S^ ^ 

\j\~>z^ZjJ>^[ iCy^C^ l£^ OOiJ 1 

J*~-&)z\ £ (J%j 0^ ALjO^Q 0 ) 

£^*?^ <^2jj o^\ '^\}j 
l £ j & j 3 ^ AL^ < *-^) \.0^*-gx-w^ g^cgx_*gV>o jLlc^ 

0]5/«J^^S! \pj*^ oig^^\ J^ji[ 


@ Those instructions, prohibitions and laws that 
we have explained to you are part of what your 
Lord has revealed to you. Do not take - O man - 
another deity together with Allah, for you will be 
thrown into Hell on the Day of Judgement, blamed 
by your own soul and by people and banished from 
every good. 

jjj) O you who claim that the angels are Allah’s 
daughters! Has your Lord chosen you - O idolaters 
- to have male children, while taking for Himself 
daughters from among the angels? Allah is above 
what you are saying. You are indeed saying a terri¬ 
ble thing about Allah by ascribing children to him 
and claiming that He has daughters persisting in 
you disbelief. 

@ I have explained in this Qur’an laws, admoni¬ 
tions and examples so that people may take heed 
and tread the path that benefits them leaving that 
which harms them. But the situation is that the na¬ 
ture of some of them has degenerated to the extent 
that this only makes them further from the truth and 
they detest it even more. 

@ Say - O Messenger, to these idolaters: If there 
were other deities along with Allah as they say as 
a fabrication and lie, then those supposed deities 
would have sought a way to Allah, the Owner of 
the Throne, to try to defeat and combat with Him 
over His dominion. 

<Sj) Allah, may He be glorified, is pure and sancti¬ 
fied from what the idolaters attribute to Him and He 
is far above what they say. 

@ The heavens glorify Allah. The earth glorifies 
Allah. Every creation in the heavens and the earth 
also glorifies Allah. There is nothing except that it declares His purity together with His praise, but you do not compre¬ 
hend their manner of glorifying Him. This is because you only understand the glorification of those who do so in your 
language. He is Forbearing, not quick to punish, and He is Forgiving to those who repent to Him. 
dj) When you - O Messenger - recite the Qur’an and they hear the warnings and admonitions it contains, I place between 
you and those who do not have faith in the Day of Judgment a barrier that prevents them from understanding the Qur’an, 
as a punishment for their turning away from it. Jj) I have put covers on their hearts so that they cannot understand the 
Qur’an, and heaviness in their ears so that they cannot listen to it in a beneficial manner. When you mention your Lord in 
the Qur’an alone, and you do not mention their so-called Allahs, they turn on their heels being far away from accepting 
Allah’s pure Oneness. {§p I know best the way their leaders listen to the Qur’an. They do not want to take guidance from 
it, but they want to mock at it and disrupt your recitation. I also know best what they secretly confer about with respect 
to their denial of and preventing others from it, when these people who wrong themselves by their denial say: You - O 
People - are only following a man who is bewitched and confused, dj) Consider - O Messenger - and be surprised at the 
various blameworthy attributes they describe you with. They have deviated from the truth and are confused. As a result 
they cannot find the true path. @) The idolaters said in denial of resurrection: When we die and become bones and our 
bodies decompose, will we be resurrected again? This is impossible. 

Beneficial Points: 

1. The claim that the angels are Allah’s daughters is a huge fabrication and an extremely sinful statement in the sight of 
Allah, the Mighty and Majestic. 2. The verses of Allah only increase most people in aversion, due to their detestation for 
the truth and their love for the falsehood they adopt. 3. There is not a single creation in the heavens and the earth that does 
not glorify Allah together with praising Him. Hence a servant should not let other creations surpass him in glorification. 
4. On account of Allah’s tolerance with His servants, He does not punish them quickly for their neglect and bad conduct. 
Allah’s mercy precedes His anger. 5. The idolaters deny the occurrence of resurrection and the Hearafter. 6. After resur¬ 
rection people will consider that they only remained in the world for a brief period of time, due to the length of their stay 
in the Hearafter. 7. If a person is astonished at the restoration of life to decomposed bones and fragments, it is because of 
his lack of comprehension, weakness of ability and a deficiency in his mental faculties. 




Al-Isra 


286 


















-c 

> 

< 






)>'jJ 

jj j^^o^~=tE_I1s j^==y>3o ^yjQ ^~~i/ of^_ 
O-*"^ c^c^isb^^^jL J?j0 oi 



^ <j^*J ^-4= 5 -^>L? S^y®-“^<3. 

&jlZQ 




jgS) Say - O Messenger: Become if you can, O idol¬ 
aters, as hard as stones or as strong as iron, but you 
will never be able to do this. 

(jp Or become some other creation greater than 
them amongst that which is considered great in your 
hearts. Allah shall restore you just as He initiated 
you and He shall bring you back to life just as He 
created you in the first instance. These opponents 
will say: Who will bring us back to life after we 
die? Say to them: He who created you in the first 
instance without any precedent shall restore you. 
Then they will shake their heads, mocking your re¬ 
sponse to them, and say unbelievingly: When will 
this restoration be? Say to them: Perhaps it is near, 
as everything which is coming will soon arrive. 
(j§S) Allah will restore you on the day He shall call 
you towards the plain of resurrection. You will then 
respond to Him, complying with His command and 
praising Him, and you will think you had not stayed 
in the grave, except for a while. 

{§} Say, O Messenger, to my believing servants: 
that they should say good words when speaking and 
refrain from bad off-putting words, because the Sa¬ 
tan exploits them to spread between them what will 
spoil their worldly life and their Hearafter. Surely, 
the satan is an open enemy, so it is necessary to be 
wary of him. 

(SjJ} Your Lord, O people, knows you best. Nothing 
of yours is hidden from Him. If He wishes to have 
mercy on you, He will have grace you with having 
faith and doing good deeds. And if He wishes to 
punish you, He can punish you by depriving you of 
faith, leaving you to die on disbelief. And He as not 
sent the Messenger as a deputy over people, to force them to believe, or stop them from disbelief or to record their deeds. 
The Messenger is only a conveyor of what Allah has ordered him to convey on His behalf. 

Your Lord, O Messenger, has full knowledge of all who are in the heavens and earth, and He fully knows their con¬ 
ditions and what they deserve. And I preferred some prophets over others through numerous followers and by revealing 
books to them. And I granted David my book, the Psalms. 

Say - O Messenger, to these idolaters: O idolaters - call upon those you claim to be Allahs besides Allah when some 
harm befalls you. They will neither be able to remove the harm from you nor can they transfer it to someone else, due to 
their inability. Anything incapable cannot be a Allah 

@ Those angels and others whom they call upon are themselves seeking good actions to bring them closer to Allah and 
competing to see who is closest to Him by obeying Him. They hope He has mercy on them and they fear His punishment. 
The punishment of your Lord, O Messenger, is what should be feared. 

@ And there is no town or city except I will send upon it punishment and destruction in this worldly life due to their dis¬ 
belief, or afflict it with a mighty punishment such as being killed, due to their disbelief. This destruction and punishment 
is a divine decree written in the Preserved Tablet. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Humankind will not have any choice when called to come out of their graves except to comply and do as asked, and this 
will occur very quickly. 2. Good speech is the origin of every good characteristic and righteous action, because whoever 
controls his tongue controls all his affairs. 3. Allah elevated some prophets over others, according to His knowledge 
and wisdom. 4. Allah does not intend for His servants except that which is good and He only commands them to what 
is beneficial for them. 5. The sign of love for Allah is a servant’s striving to do every action which brings him closer to 
Allah and competing in His closeness by making all actions sincerely for Allah. 6. Nobody besides Allah Mighty and 
Majestic can remove the harm of poverty, illness, affliction or anything else. 




AX 


{^) 


1) 


Al-Isra 


287 


Part 15 

















Cl ?) i j^ ^ S ^ Uj^Uj 

4 L/>^r^ a 51C5\S^iCUCj^ 

Ci^>-lij o^l3i C ciCj oi<iW \di 3^$ (^lS^£-Sl [ 

15^3T ^ iJiT 

($) A-r^u^js>-4-^45 ^ <j 

j^4====ClCl^lCl3 3^ 

5^ 5p <Si^==== 

^3l 1^3\ |lp 



(Sjp And I did not stop sending tangible miracles 
which the idolaters requested, such as reviving the 
dead, except because I had sent them to previous 
nations but they rejected them. I had given Thamud 
a great, clear sign, namely the camel, but they re¬ 
jected and so I hastened their punishment. And I do 
not send miracles at the hands of the Messengers 
except as a warning for their people, so that they 
believe. 

(j§| And remember, O Messenger, when I said to 
you: Your Lord has encompassed the people in 
His power and they are in His control. Allah will 
protect you from them, so convey what you have 
been ordered to convey. And I did not make what 
I clearly showed you on the Night Journey except 
as a test for the people; do they believe it or reject 
it? And I did not make the tree of Zaqqum, which 
is mentioned in the Qur’an as growing from the 
bottom of the Hellfire, except as a test for them. 

Thus, if they do not believe in these signs, they will 
never believe in anything else. And I frighten them 
by sending signs, but they do not increase through 
them except in disbelief and remaining further in 
misguidance. 

{§} And remember, O Messenger, when I said to the 
angels: Prostrate to Adam, as a prostration of greet¬ 
ing, not worship, so they complied and all prostrat¬ 
ed to him. However, Iblis refused to prostrate to 
him out of arrogance, saying: Should I prostrate to 
the one You created out of clay whereas You creat¬ 
ed me out of fire? I am better than him. 

(jfS) Iblis said to his Lord: Do you see this creature 
You have honoured above me by ordering me to 
prostrate to him? If you keep me alive until the end of this worldly life, I shall allure his children and misguide them from 
Your straight path, except a few of them You have saved and who are Your chosen servants. 

His Lord said to him: Go with those amongst them who obey you, because Hell is your recompense and their recom¬ 
pense, a complete and full recompense for your actions. 

ijj} And mislead those you can mislead through your voice which calls towards disobedience, call out to them through 
your horsemen and foot soldiers who invite towards obeying you, become a partner to them in their wealth by making 
attractive every action which opposes the sacred law. And become a partner to them in their children by falsely making 
a claim to them, attaining them through adultery and making them worship others besides Allah when taking Allah’s 
name. And make attractive to them false promises and futile aspirations. And the satan only makes false promises which 
deceive them. 

(jjS) You have no control - O Iblis - over My believing servants who act in My obedience, because Allah has repelled your 
evil from them. And Allah is sufficient as a guardian for one who relies upon Him in his affairs. 

Your Lord - O people - is the one who makes the ships sail for you in the sea, hoping to seek your sustenance through 
the profits from trade and the like. He is Merciful to you as He facilitated these means for you. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. It is from Allah’s mercy that He does not send the signs which the deniers request, so that Allah does not punish them 
immediately if they deny them. 

2. Allah tests the servants through the satan, who calls them through his speech and actions towards disobeying Allah. 

3. One form of the satan becoming a partner to man with respect to wealth and children is to not mention Allah’s name 
when eating, drinking and having intercourse, and not to teach one’s children manners. 


















@ And when you are afflicted - O idolaters - by 
some calamity or misfortune at sea such that you 
fear destruction, those whom you worship besides 
Allah leave your thoughts, and you only remember 
Allah and seek His assistance. Then when He as¬ 
sists you and saves you from your fears, and you 
return to land, you turn away from His Oneness and 
supplicating Him alone, returning to your idols. 
And man rejects the blessings of Allah. 

So do you feel secure - O idolaters - when Allah 
has delivered you safely to land that He will not 
make it collapse with you? Or do you feel secure 
that He will not make stones rain down on you as 
He did with the people of Lot, then you will not 
find any protector to protect you nor any helper to 
save you from being destroyed? 

@ Or do you feel secure that Allah will not return 
you to sea a second time, then send a strong wind 
upon you, drowning you due to your being ungrate¬ 
ful for Allah’s blessings after He saved you the first 
time, then you will not find any claimant against 
Him for what He did to you and to defend you? 

And I have honoured the children of Adam 
through intellect, making the angels prostrate to 
their father, and I subjugated for them the animals 
and vehicles that carry them on land, and the ships 
that carry them by sea. And I provided them with 
good food, drink, spouses and other things, and I 
granted them much virtue over much of My cre¬ 
ation. They must be grateful therefore for Allah’s 
favours on them. 

@ And remember, O Messenger, when every group 
will be called out by their leader whom they used to 
follow in life. So whoever is given his book of deeds in his right hand - they will read their books happily. And nothing 
will be decreased from their reward, be it as small as the thread on a date seed. 

@) And whoever’s heart is blind to accepting and submitting to the truth in this worldly life will be more blind on the 
Day of Judgment, not finding guidance to the path of paradise, and will be more astray from guidance. And the reward 
will be equal to the deed. 

@ And the idolaters were about to turn you away, O Messenger, from the Qur’an I revealed to you, so that you invent 
something else in my name which conforms to their desires. And if you did what they wanted, they would have chosen 
you as their beloved friend. 

@ And had I not favoured you by making you firm on the truth, you were about to incline towards them slightly and 
then agree with them in what they requested of you, due to their severe deception and scheming, alongside your extreme 
eagerness for them to bring faith. However, I protected you from inclining towards them. 

@ And had you inclined towards them in what they requested you, I would have given you multiplied punishment in 
this life and the Hereafter, then you would not find any helper to assist you against Me and avert punishment from you. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Humans are ungrateful for Allah’s favours, except the one whom Allah guides. 

2. Every nation will be called to its religion and book, to see if they practiced upon it or not. Allah does not punish anyone 
except after the proof against him has been established and he has opposed it. 

3. Good people will be given their book of deeds in their right hand and they will have great happiness and joy, whilst 
the opposite will be of bad people. 

4. The hatred of the wrongdoers and deniers towards the Messengers and their inheritors is apparent, due to the truth they 
carry, but it is not towards them personally. 

5. Allah protected the Prophet from the causes of evil and from people, making him firm and guiding him to the straight 
path. His followers also enjoy this according to how well they follow him. 


















@ And the disbelievers were close to troubling 
you, due to their enmity towards you, to exile you 
from Makkah. However, Allah stopped them from 
exiling you until you yourself migrated on the com¬ 
mand of your Lord. And had they exiled you, they 
would not have remained after exiling you except 
for a short while. 

@ The issue of their not remaining after you ex¬ 
cept for a short while is the constant practice of 
Allah with respect to the Messengers before you, 
namely that whenever a Messenger was exiled by 
his people, Allah sent punishment upon them. And 
you will not find, O Messenger, any change in my 
practice, but rather you will find it to be established 
and constant. 

@ Establish the prayer by performing it in the most 
complete manner in its times, which are the declin¬ 
ing of the sun from the middle of the sky - and 
this includes the zuhr and ‘asr prayers - until the 
darkness of night - and this includes the maghrib 
and ‘isha prayers. And establish the fajr prayer and 
lengthen the recitation therein, as the fajr prayer is 
attended by the angels of night and the angels of 
day. 

And in part of the night, O Messenger, stand and 
pray, so that your prayer increases your rank, and 
seeking for your Lord to raise you to the praised 
station on the Day of Judgment, as an intercessor 
for the people from the horrors of the Day of Judg¬ 
ment, and so that you attain the position of the great 
intercession, for which the first and last will praise 
you. 

@ And say, O Messenger: O my Lord, make all my 
entrances and exits in Your obedience and for Your pleasure. And give me from Yourself a clear proof through which You 
help me against my enemy. 

(jp) And say, O Messenger, to these idolaters: Islam has come, the help which Allah promised has come true, and idolatry 
and disbelief has gone. Surely, falsehood is going and will disappear, unable to remain in the face of truth. 

@ And I reveal in the Qur’an that which cures the hearts of ignorance, disbelief and doubt, cures the bodies when treated 
through it, and that which is a mercy for the believers who practice it. And this Qur’an only increases the disbelievers in 
destruction, as listening to it angers them and makes them deny and turn away from it even more. 

@ And when I grant man a blessing such as health and wealth, he turns away from thanking Allah and obeying Him, and 
moves further away out of pride. But when illness, poverty or the like befalls him, he becomes extremely despondent and 
hopeless of Allah’s mercy. 

(jp Say, O Messenger: Every man acts on the path which resembles his condition in either guidance or misguidance. But 
your Lord knows best who is most guided towards the truth. 

@ O Messenger, the disbelievers among the People of the Book ask you regarding the reality of the soul. Say to them: 
The soul is from the command of my Lord. And the knowledge you and all the creation of Allah have been granted is little 
in comparison to the knowledge of Allah. 

By Allah, if I wanted to take away, O Messenger, the revelation I sent to you by erasing it from the hearts and books, 
I could take it away, then you would not find anyone to help you and take responsibility to return it. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The unchanging custom of Allah with all nations is that every nation which rejected its Messenger and exiled him was 
quickly punished by Allah. 2. These verses prove how needy the servant is of Allah making him steadfast, and that he 
should always earnestly praise his Lord to keep him firm upon faith. 3. When the truth manifests, falsehood vanishes. 
Falsehood does not rise except in times and places where the people of truth become complacent. 4. The cure contained 
within the Qur’an includes curing the hearts of doubts, ignorance, incorrect ideas, deviation and evil objectives. 5. These 
verses prove that if a person is asked regarding a matter which is not beneficial to the questioner, it is better to avoid 
answering it, and instead tell him what he needs and guide him to what will benefit him. 

















@ However, I did not take it away, by way of mer¬ 
cy from your Lord, and I left it preserved. Surely, 
your Lord’s grace on you is great, as He made you 
a Messenger, sealed the prophets upon you, and re¬ 
vealed the Qur’an to you. 

When the idolaters alleged that this Qur’an is of the 
same category as human speech and they request¬ 
ed it be changed, Allah challenged them to bring 
something like it, saying: 

(jp Say, O Messenger: If all of humankind and j inns 
united to bring the like of this Qur’an which was re¬ 
vealed to you, in its eloquence, excellent sequence 
and pure style, they will never be able to bring any¬ 
thing like it, even if they were to all assist and help 
one another. 

(jp And I have explained to people in this Qur’an 
and brought all types of advice, reminders, com¬ 
mands, prohibitions and stories they can take les¬ 
sons from, in the hope they will believe. But most 
people have refused except to deny this Qur’an. 
And when they were unable to do so, they began to 
make difficult requests. Hence, they made the fol¬ 
lowing requests: 

(jp The idolaters said: I will never believe you un¬ 
til you extract for us from the ground of Makkah a 
spring that does not stop flowing. 

Or you have a garden with many flowers in 
which you make rivers flow profusely. 

@ Or you make the sky fall upon us, as you men¬ 
tioned, as fragments of punishment, or you bring 
Allah and the angels visibly before us, so they can 
testify to the truth of what you claim. 

(jp Or you have a house adorned with gold and oth¬ 
er things, or you ascend to the sky. And if you do ascend to it, we will never believe you have been sent unless you come 
down with a book written from Allah in which we can read that you are Allah’s Messenger. Say - O Messenger: My Lord 
is pure, I am only a human Messenger like all other Messengers. I do not have the ability to bring anything, so how can 
I bring what you have requested? 

{jp And the only thing which stopped the disbelievers from bringing faith upon Allah and His Messengers, and acting 
upon what the Messenger brought, was their refusal to accept that a Messenger can be from humankind, as they said 
denyingly: Did Allah send a Messenger from humankind? 

@ Say, O Messenger, in response to them: Had there been angels on earth who reside therein and walk about securely, as 
is your condition, we would have sent an angel Messenger to them from their own kind, because it is he who can make 
them understand what he has been sent with. It would not be wise to send to them a Messenger from humankind, and 
likewise is the case with you. 

(jP Say, O Messenger: Allah is sufficient as a witness between me and you that I am a Messenger was sent to you and that 
I have conveyed what I was sent to you. Surely, He encompasses the conditions of His servants, nothing of them being 
hidden from Him, and He sees all the secrets of their souls. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Allah has clearly explained in the Qur’an everything that can serve as a lesson, such as advice, reminders, commands, 
prohibitions and stories, in the hope they will believe. 

2. The Qur’an is the Word of Allah and the everlasting miracle of the Prophet, and nobody can ever bring anything like it. 

3. The extreme stubbornness of the idolaters towards the Prophet and their lack of faith in him have been explained. 

4. It is part of Allah’s mercy on His servants that He sent towards them humans from amongst them, because they are 
unable to acquire from the angels. 

5. Part of Allah’s testimony for His Messenger are the miracles He aided him with, the verses He revealed to him, and His 
assisting him against his enemies and opponents. 


(m) 

jT ^ s' o 9 ^ ^ 

\ Ls-J* 

^ \ l \ l)\j=====j!> ) 


Al-Isra 


















Y^Y 




^A-A** t"£ ^ 

*3 


1 0 

a\ 3 ^5J *0\l^-iSL \S <5 £>jy 

Jj^t ^ \ jjv^-3 \ ^"0^9 (3l_aj^j ^ 

I JviCa iA^\p j\g (" ) VjjP^I^a 

\ Jl>*jS l<^lj±b 

Jf3^ SV^VS 0 V^-^ QS?>^d 


«j4» 



@ And whoever Allah gives the ability for guid¬ 
ance is truly guided. And whoever He removes 
from it and leads astray, you will never find for 
them, O Messenger, protectors to guide them to the 
truth, repel harm from them and bring them benefit. 

And I will gather them on the Day of Judgment, be¬ 
ing dragged on their faces, not seeing, speaking or 
hearing. Their abode towards which they will go is 
Hell. Whenever the flames begin to subside, I will 
make them burn even more. 

{§} That punishment which they will meet is their 
recompense due to their denial of my signs which I 
sent to my Messengers, and because they said, con¬ 
sidering resurrection to be improbable: When we 
die and turn in to decomposed bones and scattered 
particles, will we be resurrected after this as a new 
creation? 

When they mentioned what they were holding onto 
in denying the resurrection, Allah refuted them by 
saying: 

(Sj§5 Do these deniers of the resurrection not know 
that Allah, who created the heavens and who cre¬ 
ated the earth despite their greatness, has power to 
create the likes of them? So whoever has the power 
to create something great has the power to create 
something smaller. And Allah has made a limited 
time for them in this world in which their lives will 
come to an end, and He has made a time for their 
resurrection in which there is no doubt. But despite 
the proofs for resurrection being clear, the idolaters 
refuse except to reject the resurrection. 

HI Say - O Messenger, to these idolaters: If you 
possessed my Lord’s treasures which never deplete 
or finish, you would desist from spending them, fearing they will deplete until you will turn poor. And it is human nature 
to be miserly, except if one is a believer who spends hoping for Allah’s reward. 

And when the Prophet (peace be upon him) faced the denial of the idolaters, consolation came to him through the story 
of Moses with Pharaoh and his people. He said: 

Hi I granted Moses nine clear proofs which bore testimony for him. They are the staff, the hand, the famine, decrease in 
fruits, the hurricane, locusts, lice, frogs and blood. O Messenger, ask the Jews when Moses brought these miracles to their 
predecessors and Pharaoh said: I see you, O Moses, as a man afflicted by magic, as you bring strange things. 

(Jf| Moses said in response to him: O Pharaoh, you know for sure that these signs have not been sent except by Allah who 
is the Lord of the heavens and the earth. He has sent them as proofs of His power and the truthfulness of His Messenger. 
But you have rejected. And I know, O Pharaoh, that you are going to be a destroyed loser. 

(|f| So Pharaoh intended to punish Moses (peace be upon him) and his people by exiling them from Egypt, so I destroyed 
him and all the armies with him by drowning them. 

|f| And I said to the Israelites after destroying Pharaoh and his armies: Settle in the land of the Levant. Then when the 
Day of Judgment comes, I shall bring you all to the plain of gathering for the accounting. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Allah alone is responsible for guidance and misguidance. Whoever He guides is truly guided, and whoever He mis¬ 
guides and abandons has nobody to guide him. 

2. The abode of the disbelievers and their residence is Hell. Whenever its fire will cool, Allah will increase it with burning 
fire. 

3. It is necessary to hold firm to Allah when the transgressors and tyrants are threatened. 

4. The transgressors and tyrants resort to using dominance and power when they face the people of truth, because they 
are unable to face them with proof and explanation. 



0 lx£=>; J&j \\y^2i\ 
















^<d\2ut< - )\ l^j 3y (^r^j 4i3j4 jp-4 


\J 


0 ^%a> <jSsS <j44 \ \o \ 

^3 j Wa^ o^*) \_\5>4 oy^ 24 j^Lo)^ Ji 


j^4j3j \ 45 l£434^3^ ^ 




<334 St<^J J 4 J*545 <4iJ3V ^c^^AAS 


Ip And with truth I revealed the Qur’an on Mu¬ 
hammad (peace be upon him) and with truth it 
came down on him, without any change or tamper¬ 
ing. And I did not send you, O Messenger, except 
to give glad tidings of paradise to those mindful of 
Him and to warn the disbelievers and sinful of Hell. 
HJ And I sent it as a Qur’an which I have separated 
and explained, in the hope that you read it to people 
|£ slow| y and carefully, as this is more effective for 
^ > * ^ ^ ^ pgK understanding and reflecting. And I revealed it in 

ZS &J §§» separate portions according to incidents and con- 
^ ^ *o + 5 *>** ^ > lg^ ditions. 

5\ ® Say, O Messenger: Believe in it, for your belief 

^ ^ ^ ^ Bj* w iU not increase it in any way, or do not believe in 

L ~ i [^ 1 |p^ it, for your disbelief will not decrease it in any way. 

'— - ^ ^ " Wg* Surely, those who read the previous divine books 

& and who understood the revelation and prophecy 
when the Qur’an is recited to them fall on their fac- 

t es, prostrating to Allah out of gratitude. 

(jp And they say in their prostration: Our Lord will 
never break His promise. The promise He made of 
sending Muhammad (peace be upon him) is going 
to happen. Surely, our Lord’s promise of this and 
other matters will definitely occur. 

Ip And they fall on their faces, prostrating to Al¬ 
lah and crying out of His fear. And listening to the 
Qur’an and contemplating its meanings increases 
them in submission to Allah and fearing Him. 

Ip Say, O Messenger, to those who criticise you 
for supplicating by saying, ‘O Allah, O Merciful’: 
Allah and the Merciful are names of His, so suppli¬ 
cate Him with any of them or other names of His. 
For Him are all beautiful names, and these two are 
amongst them, so supplicate Him through these two or other beautiful names of His. And do not recite loudly in your 
prayer in case the idolaters hear you and do not recite so quietly that the believers cannot hear you, but rather choose a 
middle path between the two. 

(jp Say - O Messenger: All praise is for Allah who deserves all types of praise and who is exalted from having a child or 
a partner, thus He has no partner in His kingdom. And He is not afflicted by disgrace or weakness, hence He has no need 
for anyone to help and support Him. So exalt Him abundantly, and do not attribute any child or partner to Him nor any 
helper or supporter. 

The Cave (SGrah Al-Kahf) 





> ?J\ 




0\ 4543 x£\\J \s^^4V5 4^5 


5 


® Themes of the Surah: 

It focuses on how to deal with trials and to distinguish the right priorities therein, presenting examples of this. 

® Explanation: 

@ Praise of the attributes of perfection and majesty and for the outer and inner favours is for Allah alone, who revealed 
the Qur’an to His servant and Messenger, and did not put any crookedness or diversion from the truth in this Qur’an, 
jjj) But rather He made it straight without any contradiction or discrepancy in it, to frighten those who deny the truth of 
a severe punishment which awaits them from Allah, and to tell the believers who do good actions what will please them, 
namely that there is a good reward for them which no other reward compares with. 

Cp Living in this reward forever, without it being cut off from them. 

(Sj) And it frightens the Jews, Christians and some of the idolaters who said: Allah has taken a son. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Allah revealed the Qur’an which comprises truth, justice, the sacred law and the best rule. 

2. It is permissible to cry in prayer out of fear of Allah. 

3. Supplication or recitation in prayer should be moderate between being loud and silent. 

4. The noble Qur’an comprises every good action which leads to what makes the souls happy and joyous. 





























La__^0 \ \ j Cjij^y^ c-T^p I 

'^^ { ^mC>\ lAac>- j 

Ol^-i 0 oj^ 

0 ££ 



@ These fabricators have no knowledge of their 
claim that Allah has a son and nor did their fa¬ 
thers whom they followed in this regard have any 
knowledge. This statement which has escaped their 
mouths without any understanding is heinous. They 
only speak a lie which has no basis or support. 

© Then perhaps, O Messenger, you will end up 
destroying yourself out of grief and remorse if they 
do not believe this Qur’an. But do not do this, as 
giving them guidance is not your responsibility; 
you are only responsible for conveying. 

© Surely, I have made the creation on the face of 
this earth an adornment for it, so I can test them 
to see which of them does the best actions which 
please Allah and which of them is worst in actions, 
so that I may reward everyone with what they de¬ 
serve. 

© And I am going to turn the creation on the face 
of this earth into dust free from vegetation, and this 
will be after the lifespan of the creation on earth 
expires, so let them take heed from this. 

© Do not think, O Messenger, that the story of 
the people of the cave and the tablet on which their 
names were written are from our amazing signs. In 
fact, other signs such as creating the heavens and 
earth are more amazing. 

@ Remember, O Messenger, when the believing 
youngsters took refuge in the cave, fleeing with 
their religion. Then they said in their supplication to 
their Lord: Our Lord, give us mercy from Yourself, 
by forgiving our sins and saving us from our ene¬ 
mies, and grant us guidance towards the right path 
and correctness in the matter of migrating from the 
disbelievers and in faith. 

© Then after they went and took refuge in the cave, I put a barrier on their ears from hearing, and I put them to sleep 
for many years. 

© Then after their lengthy sleep I woke them up to demonstrate which of the two groups disputing their duration of stay 
in the cave knows this duration best. 

© I am informing you, O Messenger, of their affair, truthfully without any doubt. Surely, they were youngsters who 
believed in their Lord and obeyed Him, and I increased them in guidance and firmness on the truth. 

© And I strengthened their hearts with faith and firmness on it, and to be patient in leaving one’s homeland for its sake, 
when they stood to proclaim their faith in Allah alone in front of the disbelieving king, and they said: The Lord I believe 
in and worship is the Lord of the heavens and earth. I will never worship the Allahs you have falsely claimed besides Him. 
I will have said an unjust and far-off statement if I worship others besides Him. 

© Then they turned to each other saying: These are our people who have taken deities which they worship besides Allah. 
They do not have any clear proof for worshipping them, so there is no greater oppressor than one who falsely attributes 
a partner to Allah. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. One who calls to Allah must convey and strive to the best of his ability, whilst relying on Allah in this regard. If people 
are guided, it is good, but he should not grieve or regret if they do not. 2. Knowledge of the duration the people of the 
cave stayed shows precise counting and recognising the complete power, wisdom and mercy of Allah. 3. The verses 
contain clear proof for fleeing with one’s religion and leaving one’s family, children, relatives, friends, home and wealth 
out of fear of trials. 4. It is important to pay attention to proper upbringing of the youth, as they are more pure-hearted 
and enthusiastic, and they are responsible for the revival of nations. 5. The youngsters combined between affirming Allah 
alone being the Lord and He alone being worthy of worship, and they maintained this. This is the biggest proof of their 
recognising Allah perfectly and Allah increasing them in guidance. 


0 iS Ijj 

_. ^ "" 

















@ Now that you have moved away from your 
people, and have left what they worship instead of 
Allah, and you have worshipped Allah alone, then 
take refuge in the cave fleeing to protect your reli¬ 
gion. Allah, may He be glorified, will shower His 
mercy on you to protect you from your enemies, 
and will make for you an easy means of livelihood 
that you could benefit from in place of the life that 
you had when living amongst your people. 

@ They thus fulfilled the instruction and Allah 
put them to sleep and protected them from their 
enemy. You - O one who looks at them - will see 
the sun when it rises from the east inclining away 
from their cave to the right of one entering it; and 
at the time of sunset it moves away from the cave 
towards the left but does not strike it directly. They 
are therefore in perpetual shade unaffected by the 
heat of the sun. They are in a wide space within 
the cave where the air they require reaches them. 
The abovementioned occurrences viz. their taking 
refuge in the cave, their being put to sleep, the sun’s 
deviation from them, the spaciousness in the cave 
and their salvation from their people are all won¬ 
drous acts of Allah that indicate His power. Who¬ 
ever Allah guides to the path of guidance, such a 
person is rightly guided in reality. Whoever Allah 
forsakes and lets go astray, then you will never find 
anyone to help and guide him to the right path. This 
is because guidance is in Allah’s Hands and not in 
his. 

@ You - O one who looks at them - will think they 
are awake, because their eyes are open, though in 
actual fact they are asleep. I turn them over in their 
sleep, sometimes to the right and sometimes to the left, so that the earth does not consume their bodies. Their dog that 
accompanied them stretches out its forelegs at the entrance of the cave. If you had come across them and seen them, you 
would have turned and run away being afraid of them, and your soul would have been filled with fear of them. 

Just as I did to them the wondrous acts that I have mentioned, I awakened them after a long period of time and they be¬ 
gan to ask one another about the period that they had spent asleep. One of them responded: I remained asleep for one day 
or part of one day. One of them, to whom it was not clear how long they had spent asleep, responded: Your Lord knows 
best about the period you had remained asleep, so entrust the knowledge of that to Him and get busy with what concerns 
you. Send one of you with these silver coins to the city we know and let him see which of the inhabitants of that city are 
most pure in their food and earnings. He should proceed with caution when entering and leaving and when dealing. He 
must also be tactful and not let anyone find out where you are, because that will result in great harm. 

@ If your people discover you and find out where your whereabouts, they will kill you by stoning you, or they will 
force you to return to their deviated creed that you used to follow before Allah favoured you by guiding you to the true 
religion. If you return to that you will never succeed - not in this world nor in the Hearafter. Instead, you will suffer a 
great loss in both places on account of your leaving the true religion to which Allah had guided you and your returning 
to that deviated creed. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. It was out of Allah’s wisdom and power that He turned them onto their sides, right and left, so that the earth does not 
spoil their bodies. This is a lesson from Allah to His servants. 

2. The permissibility of using dogs when needed for hunting or guarding. 

3. The benefit a person derives from keeping company with good and righteous people even if he is lesser than them in 
status. The mention of the dog was preserved because it had accompanied people of virtue. 

4. The verses indicate the legitimacy of appointing a proxy and to be diplomatic and gentle when dealing with people. 










Cs&j cJt ^^^=== 4 /-^ 

Cj>\ j \ sljZZJA \ * 0 





Al-Kahf 


295 




















OJ 




£)\j -XCj ^ _> j \ s o 

\^Ap s ^^\ J^jL^jllc^ >4-i3 >-4^1^^ 


>0 






«-}j-s^ "^syAs"^ i v >-4^AjoL a >^^.-^^ pic' 

>^J>4==>'Aj «A\ e-Lb Cl'' ^ 10 \AAliAi JAS (ji 
— £^\_xia> l£S£%Jj (J£M O' 2^Ji> o*i-ui bj. 
t*_-"A?A-L>1? CJ^r^f 2>jL,<i*i\5 J~ g g.l‘\j l A~ AfQ 
o£j$)j oyLlA clOc- j>A ^j5oJ \AjjLAA <Js\ JS (<£) 
A^i^_jC}’ Oo^^-Uj^O - ^ - ^ L A? 

L-jb^=,~ r^OVA\ (VA \A JtAAQ^ aS-\zJla^=lA/ j 

JAA'y o\jJ 


@ Just as I did those wondrous acts, of putting 
them to sleep and awakening them after many 
years, indicating My Power, I caused them to be 
discovered by the people of their city, so that those 
people would know that the promise of Allah to 
help the believers and of resurrection is true, and 
that the rising is coming without doubt. After the 
matter of the people of the cave was exposed and 
they had passed away, those who discovered them 
differed: What should they do with regard to them? 

One group said: Build over the entrance of the cave 
a building that will serve as a barrier and will pre¬ 
serve them. Their Lord knows best about their con¬ 
dition and their condition requires that they have 
some special status in His sight. The influential 
people who did not have knowledge or a proper call 
said: I will set up over them a place of worship in 
their honour and as a memoir of their location. 

{§} Some of those who delve into their incident will 
say about their number: They were three and their 
dog was the fourth amongst them. Others will say: 

They were five and their dog was the sixth amongst 
them. Both groups only said this as a guess without 
any proof. Some of them will say: They were seven 
and their dog was the eighth amongst them. Say, 

O Messenger: Your Lord knows best about their 
number. No one knows their number except for a 
few people whom Allah has informed about their 
number. So do not dispute with regard to their num¬ 
ber or any other matter of theirs with the people of 
the scripture or with others except with an obvious 
argument and without delving into the matter, lim¬ 
iting it to the revelation that has come down to you 
with respect to them. Do not ask any of them about the details of their matter, because they do not know about it. 

@ Do not say - O Prophet - about anything that you want to do tomorrow: “I am going to do this tomorrow,” because 
you do not know whether you will do it or you will be prevented from doing so? This is a directive for every Muslim. 
^ Unless you suspend doing so on Allah’s will by saying: I will do it - if Allah wills - tomorrow. Remember your Lord 
by saying: “If Allah wills” - if you forget to say it - and say: I have hope that my Lord will guide me to something closer 
than this in guidance and success. 

j) The people of the cave remained in their cave for three hundred and nine years. 

jj} Say - O Messenger: Allah knows best about how long they remained in the cave and He has told us about the period 
they remained there. No statement can be considered after Allah’s, may He be glorified. To Him alone, may He be glo¬ 
rified, belongs everything hidden in the heavens and on earth. He created and knows all of it. How well He sees! May 
He be glorified! He sees everything. How well He hears! He hears everything. They have no one to take charge of their 
matter besides Him. He does not share His rule with anyone. He alone passes judgement. 

After Allah, may He be glorified, explained that the rule is His alone, He instructed His Messenger to recite and follow 
the rule of His Lord, by saying: 

@ Read - O Messenger - and practice the Qur’an that Allah has revealed to you. Nothing can change His words, because 
they are completely true and just. You will not find any refuge to resort to or place of protection to take cover in besides 
Him. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Setting up places of worship over graves, praying in them and building on them is not permissible in our sacred law. 

2. In the story there is evidence of Allah’s power to gather and resurrect bodies from their graves and take them to account. 

3. The verses indicate that a commendable dispute and debate has the attribute of being in a manner that is best. 

4. The practice and etiquette in the sacred law is to suspend future matters on Allah’s will. 


Al-Kahf 


296 



















Ci^j ly> £^>')[j \^j j*jt 


cyj 


Dv 


^PXj oy>^\ c5p 

l^Pj^-ali 01^ 6\.$lPp* 0*\_^Jj ^1>V^LJJ^ 

^ ^ -£ < } s* J, Kkg r y'JLll IC41 

*ilp($)SP-5-^' drtP i-^S & amongst 

< ** ^ ^ ^ " ■£* let him d 

5jl ,\St Whn<=»\/<=»i 

otP^ 1 ^ o^ ^ 

^ v^i \ \ Jp \^$ 




Remain and be close with your poor compan¬ 
ions who sincerely call on their Lord in worship 
and supplication at the beginning and at the end 
of the day. Do not let your eyes overlook them in¬ 
tending to sit with people of affluence and prestige. 
Do not follow the one whose heart I have made 
neglectful of Our remembrance by sealing it and 
who instructed you to remove the poor from your 
gathering giving preference to following his desire 
over following His Lord. His actions and deeds are 
thus foolish, excessive and in vain. 

@ Say - O Messenger: to those who neglect Al¬ 
lah’s remembrance due to the heedlessness of their 
hearts: What I have brought to you is the truth. It 
is from Allah and not from me. I cannot accede to 
your request to chase away the believers. Whoever 
you wishes to have faith in this truth then 
do so for he will be pleased by the reward. 
Whoever amongst you wants to reject it let him do 
so, for he will be grieved by the punishment that 
awaits him. I have prepared for those who wrong 
themselves, by choosing disbelief, a huge fire 
whose walls will surround them and as a result they 
will not be able to escape from it. If they had to seek 
relief of water on account of the severe thirst they 
experience, they will be given water like murky oil 
that will be extremely hot and will scald their faces 
due to its heat. What a terrible drink is this drink 
that will be provided for their relief! It will not 
quench their thirst but will make it worse and it will 
not put out the flames burning their faces. What a 
miserable destination and place of residence is the 
fire! 

After Allah mentioned the punishment that He prepared for the wrongdoers, He mentioned the generous reward that He 
has prepared for the believers by saying: 

@ Those who have faith in Allah and do righteous actions have done Ill and they will receive a huge reward. I do not let 
the reward of those who do Ill go to waste. Instead, I give them their reward in full without any reduction, 
ijj) Those who are described as having faith and doing righteous actions will receive gardens to reside in, with the sweet 
rivers of paradise flowing beneath their homes. They will be adorned with bracelets of gold and they will wear green gar¬ 
ments of fine and thick silk. They will recline on couches decorated with beautiful coverings. Theirs will be an excellent 
reward and paradise will be an excellent home and place for them to reside in. 

After Allah, may He be glorified, mentioned the recompense of both the wrongdoers and the believers, He gives an ex¬ 
ample of both by saying: 

{JS Strike - O Messenger - an example of two men: a disbeliever and a believer. I gave the disbeliever two gardens, which 
I surrounded with date-palms; and in the vacant land I grew crops. 

@ Each garden produced its fruit of dates, grapes and crops and did not fall short thereof in anything, but bore it in full. 
I caused a river to flow between the two gardens so that they could be irrigated easily. 

The owner of the two gardens had other wealth and fruit and he said to his friend, as he spoke to him in conceit to 
make an impact on him, “I have more wealth than you, more support and a stronger family.” 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The virtue of keeping company with good people and applying self-restraint to be in their company and mixing with 
them even if they are poor, for being in their company carries innumerable benefits. 

2. Islam is a religion of equality. There is no difference in the law between a person of high-standing and one of low-stand¬ 
ing, rich and poor and a leader and his subordinates. 

3. Two principles for reward and the basis of salvation: Faith and righteous action, because Allah based reward in the 
world and the afterlife on these two things. 




















o a^J Jp ^\o ^ 3 J o^_j 2^\3 A^Lli( 5 ^ ^5 (™^x>\ 

^ ^ ^ ^ ^^ ^o> ^ 

d^ } A q W) l 5 3i \j 

C>L>o ^Wj.9 (^) \ A^\lA \ ~S]j3 (_4_) 

4Ai\ «-Lil»l^ cAS <^)cL>r 
j-^5 0.5 ^^($)^_ij^U 

(£) 12^3^ ^l^Jli \ 

j? ^ 'c._, ^ ^ «< 



*j 

I ^h 3 */ 


i^(^0j^S^J^\oy^Aj^4 


@ The disbeliever entered his garden along with 
the believer to show it to him, whilst he was wrong¬ 
ing himself by his disbelief and conceit. The dis¬ 
believer said: I do not think that this garden that 
you see will ever perish, because I have taken all 
measures for its survival. 

{J) I also do not think that the rising will occur. Life 
will simply continue. If it does occur and I hap¬ 
pened to be resurrected and be returned to my Lord, 
then I will find that what I will go back to after 
resurrection will be better than this garden of mine. 

My being rich in this world means that I will be rich 
after resurrection as well. 

{§} His believing friend said to him whilst having 
this conversation: Do you reject the One Who cre¬ 
ated your father, Adam, from dust. Then He created 
you from sperm. Then He made you into a male 
human being and proportioned your limbs making 
you complete? The One who has power to do all of 
that is able to resurrect you. 

But I do not profess this statement of yours. I 
simply say: He, Allah, may He be glorified, is my 
Lord, who has showered us with His blessings, and 
I do not associate anyone with Him in worship. 

(j| If only, when you entered your garden, you had 
said: As Allah wills. No one has any power except 
through Allah. He is the One Who does as He pleas¬ 
es and He is the One of strength- if you regard me 
as someone poorer than you and one with less chil¬ 
dren. 

@) I anticipate that Allah will give me something 
better than your garden and that He will send on 
your garden a punishment from the sky, making it a 
barren piece of land on which feet will slip due to its being so smooth. 

@ Or its water may sink so deep into the ground that you will never be able to reach it again in any way. Once the water 
sinks deep, the garden will not survive. 

dj) What the believer anticipated occurred. Destruction engulfed the fruit of the disbeliever’s garden and the disbeliever 
began wringing his hands on account of extreme regret and remorse over the money that he had spent on its maintenance 
and upkeep, whilst the garden had fallen over the supports on which the grapevines are spread out and he was saying: I 
wish I had believed in my Lord alone, and I had not associated anyone with Him in worship. 

(j§p This disbeliever had no group to protect him from the punishment that fell on him, whereas he was the one who used 
to boast about his group. He himself too could not stop Allah from destroying his garden. @ In that situation, victory is 
for Allah alone. He, may He be glorified, is best in rewarding His friends who have faith, as He multiplies the reward for 
them, and He is best in outcome for them. @ Strike - O Messenger - an example for those who are deceived by the world. 
In its temporality and fleeting existence it is similar to rain water that I sent down from the sky. On account of this water 
the vegetation of the earth grew and ripened. Then this vegetation is broken down into pieces and the wind carries it away 
to far-lying places and the earth once again becomes as it was previously. Allah has full power over all of that. Nothing is 
outside His ability. He gives life to whatever He wishes and causes whatever He wishes to perish. 

Beneficial Points: 

1. A believer must not surrender before the might of a wealthy disbeliever. He must advise and guide him to have faith 
in Allah, acknowledge of His Oneness and be grateful for His favours and blessings on him. 2. Any person impressed 
by any of his possessions or children must attribute the blessing to the One who bestowed it on him by saying: As Allah 
wills. There is no power except through Allah. 3. When Allah intends good for a person He gives him an early punish¬ 
ment in the world. 4. The permissiblity of praying for the ruin of the wealth of a person whose wealth is the cause for 
his transgression, rejection and loss. 5. The result of Allah’s assistance or the lack thereof will only become clear when 
the dust settles and retribution is due. This is when those who had worked will find their reward. 6. Wealth and children 
are of no use if they do not assist a person in following Allah. 7. The temporality and fleeting nature of the world. Allah 
alone is the Everlasting, Who has the power to create, destroy and revive everything. 





















@ Wealth and children are things of adornment 
in this worldly life. Wealth will only be of benefit 
in the afterlife if it is spent on that which pleases 
Allah. Actions and statements that are pleasing to 
Allah are better in reward than all the beauty in 
the world. That is the best thing a person can have 
hope in, because the beauty of the world will perish 
while the reward for actions and statements that are 
pleasing to Allah will last. 

@ Remember the day when I will remove the 
mountains from their places, and you will see the 
earth as an open plain as all the mountains, trees 
and buildings on it will be gone. I will gather all 
created things together and resurrect them, leaving 
no one. 

(Sj) People will be presented to your Lord in rows 
and He will take them to account. It will be said 
to them: Now you have come to Us individually, 
barefoot and naked as I created you the first time. 
Although you claimed that you will never be resur¬ 
rected and that I will not set for you a time and place 
in which I will recompense you for your actions. 
@ The book of deeds will be placed. Some people 
will take the book in their right hands and some will 
take it in their left hands. You - O man - will see the 
disbelievers fearful of its contents, because they are 
aware of the disbelief and sins that they sent for¬ 
ward. They will say: May we be destroyed! What 
is with this book that leaves no action of ours, small 
or big, but it has recorded and enumerated it? They 
will find all the sins they had done in their worldly 
life written and recorded. Your Lord - O Messen¬ 
ger - does not wrong anyone. He does not punish 
anyone for no reason and He does not reduce the reward of those who follows Him. 

(jp Remember - O Messenger - when I said to the angels: Prostrate to Adam as a salutation. So all of them prostrated to 
him in fulfilment of the instruction of their Lord besides Iblis. He was one of the Jinn and was not an angel. He refused 
and was too proud to prostrate. Thus he went against following His Lord. Will you - O people - then take him and his 
children as friends with whom you align yourselves instead of Me, whilst they are your enemies! How do you take your 
enemies to be your friends? How bad and ugly is the act of the wrongdoers who make Satan their friend instead of be¬ 
friending Allah! 

(Sjp These whom you have taken as friends instead of me are all servants like you. I did not make them witness the creation 
of the heavens and the earth when I created them. In fact, they were not even existent then. I did not make some of them 
witness the creation of others. I am alone in creation and planning. I would not take those human and jinn satans who lead 
others astray as my assistants as I am in no need of any assistants. 

@ Mention to them - O Messenger - the Day of Judgement, when Allah will say to those who had associated partners 
with Him in the world: Call My partners whom you claimed were partners to me so that they can help you. They will call 
them, but they will not answer their call and they will not come to their assistance. I will place between the worshippers 
and those whom they worshipped a pit of destruction, which will be for both groups, and this is the fire of Hell. 

@ The idolaters will see the fire and they will be completely certain that they are going to fall into it. They will not find 
any place to escape to from it. 

Beneficial Points: 

1. A servant must do a lot of lasting good works, which refers to any righteous statement or action that lasts till the Hear- 
after. 2. A servant must remember the terrors of the Day of Judgment and work for this day so that he can be saved from 
its terrors and enjoy the favours of Allah’s paradise and pleasure. 3. Allah honoured our father, Adam (peace be upon 
him), and the human race as a whole by instructing the angels to prostrate to him when he was first created as a sign of 
honour and as a salutation. 4. The verses exhort to treating Satan as an enemy. 

















@ I have explained in different ways, in this 
Qur’an that was revealed to Muhammad (peace be 
upon him), many types of examples so that they 
will take a lesson and pay heed. But the thing that 
is most apparent in man - especially the disbeliev¬ 
er - is to wrongfully argue. @ Nothing prevented 
the obstinate disbelievers from having faith in what 
Muhammad (peace be upon him) brought from his 
Lord. Lack of explanation did not prevent them 
from seeking Allah’s forgiveness for their sins, for 
many examples were given to them in the Qur’an 
and clear proofs came to them. The only thing that 
prevented them was their stubborn request for the 
punishment of the previous communities to be im¬ 
posed on them and for them to see the punishment 
that they were promised. @ I do not send any of 
Our Messengers except to give good news to the 
people of faith and obedience and to warn the peo¬ 
ple of disbelief and disobedience. They do not have 
the authority to make hearts accept the guidance. 

Those who disbelieved in Allah dispute with the 
Messengers despite their having clear proof, in an 
attempt to use their falsehood to remove the truth 
that was sent down to Muhammad (peace be upon 
him). They made the Qur’an and what they were 
warned of a joke and mockery, (jp There is no one 
more oppressive that the person who was reminded 
of the verses of his Lord, but he did not pay any 
attention to the threat of punishment contained 
therein and he turned away from taking a lesson, 
forgetting the disbelief and sins he had done in his 
worldly life without repenting. I have placed on the 
hearts of people with this description covers that 
prevent them from understanding the Qur’an, and 
in their ears deafness so that they cannot listen to it acceptingly. If you call them to faith they will never respond to what 
you call them towards as long as there are covers on their hearts and deafness in their ears. In order for the Prophet 
(peace be upon him) not to look forward to a hasty punishment for those who rejected him, Allah said to him: Your Lord 
- O Messenger - is One Who forgives the sins of those who repent, and One Whose Mercy encompasses everything. It 
is out of His mercy that he grants respite to sinners in order for them to repent to Him. If He was to punish these people 
who turn away, He would have hastened the punishment for them in the worldly life. But He is tolerant and merciful. He 
delayed the punishment so that they repent. They have an appointed time and place in which they will be recompensed for 
their disbelief and turning away if they do not repent, from which they will find no escape, jjp) Those disbelieving towns 
close to you such as the towns of the people of Hud, Salih and Shuayb —I destroyed them when they wronged themselves 
by disbelief and sins, and I set for their destruction an appointed time. (j§) Remember - O Messenger - when Moses (peace 
be upon him) said to his servant, Joshua the son of Nun: I will continue travelling until I reach the place where the two 
seas meet, or I will travel until such time that I meet the righteous servant and I learn from him. @ So they both travelled 
and when they reached the place where the two seas meet, they forgot the fish that they had carried as provision. Allah 
gave life to that fish and it made a pathway in the sea like a tunnel, with which the water did not come together. 

® Beneficial Points: 1. The greatness, grandeur and generality of the Qur’an as it contains every path leading to bene¬ 
ficial knowledge and perpetual bliss and every path that protects one from evil. 2. It is from Allah’s wisdom and mercy 
that He made for those who are wrong and who argue with the truth using falsehood the greatest of means to the clarity 
of truth and the plainness and corruption of falsehood. 3. The verses contain a warning to the person who leaves the truth 
after knowing it that he will be prevented from it and will not be able to come back onto it thereafter, which is the greatest 
warning and deterrent for that. 4. There is no one more unjust than the person who is reminded of the verses of his Lord 
but he neglects them and turns away from accepting them and leaving his disbelief and sins and does not repent from 
that. 5. It is Allah’s practice in the earlier and later generations that He does not punish them quickly. Instead he invites 
them to repent. If they repent He forgives them and shows them mercy. If not, He sends down His punishment. 6. The 
virtue of knowledge and travelling to seek it, taking the opportunity to meet the virtuous and the scholars even though 
they may be living in far-off places. 


0 AiT 


Al-Kahf 


300 



















Jjai 4UJ2J JIB V^jUj-Uls 

c-j\ J\S^)l^uy<2j\-\i& 

U_&^\ji\ t'^' \ \ j$L» tiiVi J\S ij 

^£&Si ^3 \ 3wy 0U^s5 

(J\Sc^AJ <S2^ oi3-^>xIL^ 

^\_Ji\ c3^). 


@ When they passed that place, Moses (peace be 
upon him) said to his servant: Bring us our lunch, 
we have experienced extreme tiredness in this jour¬ 
ney. 

@ The boy said: Do you remember what happened 
when we rested by the rock? I forgot to tell you 
about the fish. It was only Satan who made me for¬ 
get to mention it to you. The fish came to life and it 
amazingly found its way into the sea. 

{§} Moses (peace be upon him) said to his servant: 
That is what we were looking for, for that is the sign 
of the place of the righteous servant. So they turned 
back retracing their steps, so that they do not lose 
the way until they reached the rock and from there 
the entry point of the fish. 

@ When they reached the place at which the fish 
was lost, they found there one of My righteous 
servants (who was Khidr peace be upon him), to 
whom I had given mercy, and to whom I had taught 
knowledge that people were not aware of, which is 
what is contained in this story. 

@ Moses humbly and politely said to him: May I 
follow you so that you can teach me some of the 
knowledge that Allah has taught you which consti¬ 
tutes guidance to the truth? 

{§} Khidr said: You will not be able to bear patience 
over what you see of my knowledge, because it will 
not correspond with your knowledge. 

How will you bear patience over the actions that 
you see for which you do not know the proper rea¬ 
son, because you judge them according to the limit 
of your knowledge?! 

@ Moses said: You will find me, Allah willing, to 
be patient over those actions of yours that I see and committed to following you. I will not go against any instruction that 
you give me. 

@ Khidr said to Moses: If you follow me, then do not ask me about anything that you see me doing until I myself tell 
you the reason. 

@ When they agreed to that, they set out to the seashore where they came across a ship, which they boarded for free as 
an honour to Khidr. Khidr then made a hole in the ship by removing one of its planks. Moses said to him: Did you make a 
hole in the ship whose owners let us board for free in the hope that they may drown. You have done something confusing 
and puzzling. 

@ Khidr said to Moses: Did I not say: You will not be able to bear patience over what you see me doing?! 

|j) Moses (peace be upon him) said to Khidr: Do not take me to task on account of my breaking the pledge forgetfully 
and do not make it difficult and hard for me to accompany you. 

@ After they disembarked from the ship they set out walking along the seashore, when they saw a young boy who was 
still not an adult playing with the other boys. Khidr killed him and Moses said to him: Did you kill a pure soul that is still 
a minor for no sin? You have really done something evil!! 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The permissiblity of taking a servant whether at home or on a journey to take care of matters and for the sake of com¬ 
fort. 2. The recommendation that a person’s servant be intelligent and smart so that he can achieve his objective. 

3. Divine assistance descends on a servant in accordance with his fulfilment of his obligation. A person who fulfils Allah’s 
instructions is assisted more than others. 4. Being courteous to the teacher and the student’s addressing him in the most 
polite manner. 5. Forgetfulness does not require a person to be taken to task. A person is not held liable for it and no law 
is linked to it. 6. An accomplished learned person can learn a science that he has not mastered from the one who has 
mastered it, even though the latter may be many ranks lower than the former in knowledge. 7. To attribute knowledge 
and other virtues to Allah, most High, to acknowledge this and thank Allah for it. 8 Beneficial knowledge is knowledge 
that guides one to good. 9. The virtue of patience. Whoever practices and observes patience will attain anything he works 
towards. 


j j \ lilii Is (£) \ 

>7 Jjfii 






















r* y 




<1^ JsV^ 36* 

r_c^. l^\s 3 \ Jvlte < ^\S ( w ) )_>^>-^ ^^iC'OA^xJ cALij) (Jli 
^ X\ _ *» '*' . 


(L 
,5 \ 


AUi 

'i 

o' 

C 


@ Khidr said to Moses (peace be upon him): “I 
had said To You: O Moses, you will never be able 
to bear the matter I will carry out”. 

@ Moses (peace be upon him) said to Khidr: “For¬ 
give me a second time. But if I ask you about any¬ 
thing after this time, then leave me, for you would 
have reached the limit, for which you can be ex¬ 
cused for leaving my company, as I would have 
opposed your command three times”. 

@ They then walked until they came to the people 
of a village from whom they asked for food, but 
the people of the village refused to feed them and 
fulfil the right of hospitality towards them. Then 
they found a wall in the village which was tilting, 
and about to fall and break. So Khidr fixed it until 
it was straight, so Moses (peace be upon him) said 
to Khidr: “If you wanted to take a wage for fixing 
it, you could have, as we need it after they have 
refused to host us”. 

@ Khidr said to Moses: “This objection to my not 
taking a wage for erecting the wall is the point of 
separation between me and you. I shall inform you 
of the explanation of what you saw me doing but 
which you were unable to bear. 

As for the ship which you criticised me for 
breaking, it belonged to some weak people who 
worked on the sea and who were unable to protect 
it. So I wanted to make it defective by what I did 
to it, so that it would not be taken by a king who 
was ahead of them and who would forcefully take 
possession of every good ship from its owners but 
leave every defective ship. 

(Sjp As for the boy you criticised me for killing, his 
parents were believers but he was an unbeliever according to Allah’s knowledge. So I feared that if he grew up, he would 
cause them to disbelieve in Allah out of their intense love for him or their intense need towards him. 

So I wanted Allah to replace them with a child better than him in religion, piety and purity from sins, and more mer¬ 
ciful to his parents. 

(lj§S) As for the wall which I fixed but you criticised me for fixing, it belonged to two young boys in the town we went to 
and whose father had passed away. Beneath the wall some wealth of theirs was buried. And the father of these two boys 
was pious. So your Lord intended, O Moses, that they reach the age of discerning and grow up, and take out their wealth 
which was buried underneath it, because if the wall were to fall now, their wealth would become exposed and go to waste. 
And this plan was your Lord’s mercy on them. And I did not do this of my own judgment. This is the explanation of what 
you were unable to bear”. 

After Allah mentioned the story of Khidr, He mentioned the story of DhuT-Qamayn, due to the connection between the 
two, as both of them strove to help the weak. So He said: 

(Sj§j) And the idolaters and Jews ask you to test you, O Messenger, regarding the one who had two horns (Dhu’l-Qarnayn). 
Say: I shall tell you some of his story which you can take lessons from and be reminded by. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. It is important to take one’s time, verify and not rush towards passing judgment on a matter until one knows what is in¬ 
tended thereby and what the objective is. 2. The future actions of the servants should be made contingent on Allah’s will. 
3. The upshots of matters are according to the apparent, and worldly rulings regarding wealth, life etc., all depend on 
the apparent. 4. A greater evil is averted by carrying out a smaller evil and the greater benefit is taken into consideration 
by leaving the lesser benefit. 5. It is permissible to do something with the wealth of others when it is beneficial and to 
remove harm, be it without permission, and even if it means some portion of the wealth of others is destroyed. 6. To serve 
the pious or those connected to them is better than serving others. 7. A person should not separate from his companion 
and leave his company under any circumstances, until he has admonished him and excused himself from him. 8. One 
should be respectful with Allah by attributing good towards Him and not attributing bad towards Him. 9. Allah protects 
a pious servant and his children. 


%_5 















^j^~o)P l|^4^J>o Va <^jJxj* ^ \ ^iiQ^"($) 

a^cXj o' 1^4$ ^-X^o 

MjO < 5 ^ L ^' <■ 

\j^XJ\'j£sj ^JAjO I 






(Sjp I gave him position on earth and granted him of 
everything which is of relevance to his goals, a path 
by which he can reach his objective. 

@ So he took the means and paths leading to his 
objective that I had granted him, and then headed 
West. 

(Sf§S) And he travelled on earth until he reached the 
end of the land towards the setting place of the sun, 
seeing it as though it was setting in a hot spring 
of black clay. And he found an unbelieving people 
by the setting place of the sun. So I said to him, to 
test him: “O DhuT-Qarnayn, you can either pun- 
EEg ish these people by killing them or through other 
means, or you can be good to them”. 

@ Dhu’l-Qarnayn said: “As for the one who asso¬ 
ciates partners with Allah and persists in this, I shall 
punish him by killing him in this life, then he will 
return to his Lord on the Day of Judgment and He 
shall then punish him with a terrible punishment. 
(Jj| And as for the one who believes in Allah and 
does good deeds, for him is paradise, as a reward 
from your Lord for his faith and good deeds. And 
I shall say to him of my command that which con¬ 
tains ease and lenience”. 

(Sj| Then he took a path different to his first route, 
heading towards the direction of the sunrise. 

@ And he travelled until when he reached the place 
where the sun rises, he found it rising on a people 
I had not given any houses or the shade of trees to 
protect them from the sun. 

@) This is the matter of DhuT-Qarnayn, and 
My knowledge has encompassed the power and 
strength he had. 

(Sj) Then he followed a path different to the first two, spreading between the East and West. 

{§{]) And he travelled until he reached a gap between two mountains, and he found before them a people who could barely 
understand the speech of others. 

(Sjj) They said: “O Dhu’l-Qarnayn, Gog and Magog (meaning two great nations from the children of Adam) are causing 
corruption on earth by killing and so forth, so can we give you some wealth so you can make a barrier between us and 
them?” 

djj) DhuT-Qarnayn said: “The kingdom and strength my Lord has given me is better than any wealth you can give me, so 
support me with men and tools. I shall make a barrier between you and them. 

Bring pieces of iron”. They brought them to him, so he began building with them between the two mountains, until 
when he had made them level with his building, he said to the workers: “Light these pieces”, until when the iron pieces 
turned red, he said: “Bring copper to pour on top of it”. 

@ So Gog and Magog were unable to climb over it due to its height nor were they able to make a hole in it from beneath 
due to its hardness. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. DhuT-Qarnayn was one of the believing kings who ruled the world and dominated its people. Allah had granted him a 
vast kingdom, and gifted him with wisdom and beneficial knowledge. 

2. It is one of the duties of the king or ruler to support the people in defending their homes and maintaining their borders 
through his own wealth. 

3. Good, sincere people are zealous to do things to seek the pleasure of Allah. 


h|| 

As>- Aj ASH 

l )' ' l 5 . 0 J ^>-1 j*j 














\ J| (3 (^)H^- 




%&Jd 


A^Pl 


cJb~>-<z Aj\j4? J-^rD OlAi i^-flS cjui\ e*Uij\ ( 

C^)^3j JLju^JL^)^\ ^ 
oi-^^ oi($) 
ola^ 0 Sfy 


@ Dhu’l-Qarnayn said: “This barrier is a mer¬ 
cy from my Lord. It will come between Gog and 
Magog and causing corruption on earth, and it will 
stop them from it. Then when the time which Al¬ 
lah has appointed for their release comes before the 
Final Hour, He will level it to the ground. And the 
promise of Allah to level it to the ground and to 
release Gog and Magog is established and will not 
be broken”. 

(jp And I shall leave Gog and Magog to crowd and 
mix with one another on the day the barrier breaks, 
due to their large numbers. And the Trumpet will 
be blown a second time, then I shall bring them 
all back to life. I shall gather their bones and meat 
which had scattered, then I shall bring them to the 
gathering place. 

(ff| And I shall present Hellfire to the unbelievers 
without any confusion, so they can see it clearly. 

HJ) I shall present it to the disbelievers who were 
blind to the remembrance of Allah in the world, due 
to the veil which barred them from it, and they were 
unable to listen to and accept the verses of Allah. 

(|f| So did those who disbelieved in Allah think to 
make My servants among the angels, messengers 
and satans, Allahs besides me? I have prepared 
Hellfire as a residing place for the disbelievers. 

|p Say - O Messenger: Shall we tell you, O people, 
which people are the biggest losers in their actions? 

(jf| Those who will see on the Day of Judgment that 
the effort they used to make in the world has gone 
to waste, whilst they thought they were doing well 
in their effort and that they will benefit from their 
actions. The reality was the exact opposite. 

HI They are those who disbelieve in the signs of their Lord that prove His oneness and disbelieved in meeting Him, hence 
their actions became void due to their denial, and so they will not have any value with Allah on the Day of Judgment. 

HI That recompense which is prepared for them is Hellfire, due to their denying Allah and making His revealed verses 
and His messengers a mockery. 

After Allah mentioned the punishment of the disbelievers. He mentioned the reward of the believers. 

".' 7 Those who have faith in Allah and do good actions will have the highest of gardens, as a place to honour them. 

(Sj| Staying therein forever, they will not want to move from there, as no reward can come close to it. 

HI Say - O Messenger: the words of my Lord are many. If the ocean were to be ink to write them with, the ocean water 
would finish before His words come to an end, and if I were to bring more oceans they would also finish. 

(jj| Say - O Messenger: I am only a human like you, to whom it is revealed that your true Allah is One Allah who has 
no partner, namely Allah. Whoever fears meeting his Lord should do actions which conform with the sacred law, being 
sincere to his Lord in them, and should not associate any partner to his Lord in worship. 

Beneficial Points: 

1. It is established that the resurrection and gathering will take place, by gathering jinn and mankind on the plains of 
judgment with the second blowing of the Trumpet. 

2. The biggest losers on the Day of Judgment are those whose effort in the world goes to waste, whereas they think they 
are doing good by worshipping others besides Allah. 

3. It is impossible to enumerate the words of Allah, His knowledge, wisdom, and secrets, even if the seas and oceans were 
ink without bounds to write with. 




I IfZriO 




Al-Kahf 

















Surah Maryam (Mary) 




syyA 

\ (3 j_ uj J \s^) Ljoi- X\ Jo. j AjJ e£jb 


< 3 |/^ ^^\^===?j <s %\jj 

(J>^\ ^l.4===gj^iib ^\ cSj j 

j\S^> 


> 0 CLJ 







® Themes of the Surah: 

It shows how Allah manifests His mercy with His 
friends, such as granting pious offspring, and it 
declares Allah to be free from having children and 
helpers, in refutation of the liars. 

Explanation: 

(JIJS) Kaf Ha Ya ‘Ayn Sad. The discussion on similar 
letters has already passed in Surah Al-Baqarah. 

(0) This is mention of your Lord’s mercy on His 
servant (peace be upon him), which I relate to you 
to take lessons from. 

@ When he called on his Lord quietly, so that it is 
more likely to be accepted, 
jj) He said: “My Lord, indeed my bones have be¬ 
come weak, the white hairs on my head have in¬ 
creased, and I was not unsuccessful in my suppli¬ 
cating You. In fact, every time I supplicated You, 
You accepted. 

@ And I feared that my relatives will not be able to 
fulfil the rights of the religion after my death, due 
to their engrossment in the worldly life. And my 
wife is barren, so grant me from Yourself a child 
to help me. 

@ He will inherit prophethood from me and inherit 
from the family of Jacob (peace be upon him), and 
O Lord, make him pleasant in his religion, charac¬ 
ter and knowledge”. 

@ So Allah accepted his supplication and called 
out to him: “O Zechariah, I am informing you of 
what will please you. I have accepted your suppli¬ 
cation and granted you a boy whose name will be 

John. I have not given this name to anyone before him”. 

(SjfJ) Zechariah said, amazed at the power of Allah: “How will a child be born to me when my wife is barren and I have 
reached the limit of old age and weakness of bones?” 

{J} The angel said: “The matter is as you have said, namely that your wife is barren and that you have reached the limit of 
old age and weakness of bones. However, your Lord said: For your Lord to create John from a barren mother and a father 
who has reached the extreme old age is easy. And I created you before this, O Zechariah, whilst you were not something 
to be mentioned as you were non-existent”. 

@ Zechariah (peace be upon him) said: “My Lord, give me a sign I can feel content with and which will show that the 
glad tiding given to me by the angels has been attained”. He said: “Your sign of having attained what you were given 
glad tidings of is that you will not be able to speak to people for three days, not due to any illness, but rather you will be 
sound and well”. 

Cj}) Then Zechariah came out to his people from his place of prayer, and indicated to them without speaking to glorify 
Allah at the beginning and end of the day. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. White hair is a sign of weakness and old age, and the envoy, forerunner and warner of death. 2. Weakness and help¬ 
lessness are amongst the most beloved means to seek closeness to Allah, because they show absolving oneself from any 
power or strength and show attachment of the heart with the power and strength of Allah. 3. It is recommended for a 
person to mention Allah’s favours on him in his supplication and that which is appropriate to submission. 4. One should 
be eager for religious benefit and give it priority over all other benefits. 5. It is permissible to pray for a child and it is 
permissible to beseech Allah for the guidance of one’s child, in following the prophets (peace and blessings upon them) 
and the noble. 6. Keeping names with good meanings is recommended. 7. These verses contain proof of Allah’s clear 
power: just as Allah created man from nonexistence when he was nothing, He has the power to create John and bring him 
into existence. 8. It is permissible to act according to understandable signs. 




Maryam 


305 






























jJj 1^ ^fP pl^=3j \£jj& 

JL>j^i^i j]J 0 

oJC3o\ 

<1^*21? (^l£3^2lj \^Ca [^Xjti\ JV* 

ij^€\\^\2i0^4 3S^\J^0V^\ 

(^0^====l> c^AJ 

\li 

^A_> C> Xpol^ ^(^ll^jgjg\ 0^=L? i^4- 1 

•£ 


>J 


@ Then John was bom to him. Once he reached an 
age in which he could be addressed, I said to him: 

“O John, take the Torah firmly and with effort”. 

And I granted him understanding, knowledge, firm¬ 
ness, and resolve, whilst he was still a child. 

@ And I granted him mercy from myself and kept 
him pure from sins. And he was pious, abiding by 
the commands of Allah and refraining from His 
prohibitions. 

@ And he was dutiful to his parents, soft with them 
and kind towards them. And he was neither arrogant 
regarding obedience to his Lord or his parents nor 
was he disobedient towards his Lord or his parents. 

@ And peace and safety be on him from Allah on 
the day he was born, the day he shall die and leave 
this life, and on the day he shall be raised alive on 
the Day of Judgment. These three places are the 
most frightening a person goes through, so if he is 
safe in them, he shall not have any fear in any other 
place. 

@ And mention, O Messenger, in the book re¬ 
vealed to you the story of Mary (peace be upon 
her), when she moved away from her family and 
stayed separately in a place to their east. 

(jp Thus, she made for herself a veil from the peo¬ 
ple which would cover her, so that they cannot 
see her when she is worshipping her Lord. Then I 
sent Gabriel (peace be upon him) to her, thus he 
appeared to her in the form of a perfectly-formed 
human. So she thought he has a malicious intention 
towards her. 

@ So when she saw him in the form of a perfect¬ 
ly-formed human heading towards her, she said: “I 
seek protection of the Merciful from you that any harm should come to me from you, if you are pious and fear Allah”. 
@ Gabriel (peace be upon him) said: “I am not a human. I am only a Messenger from your Lord who He has sent to you 
for me to give you a good pure child”. 

@ Mary said surprisingly: “How can I have a child when neither a husband nor anyone else has come near me nor am I 
an adulteress that I should have a child?” 

@ Gabriel said to her: “The matter is as you said, namely that no husband or anyone else has touched you nor are you an 
adulteress. However, your Lord said: ‘To create a child without a father is easy for Me. And it is so that the child granted 
to you is a sign for people of the power of Allah, and a mercy from Me to them, due to the good they will achieve through 
him. And the creation of this child of yours is a fixed decree from Allah and written in the Preserved Tablet’. 

(jp So she conceived him after the angel blew into her, then she withdrew with him to a place far from the people. 

@ And the pangs of childbirth struck her and made her take refuge by the trunk of a date tree. Mary said: “If only I had 
died before this day and I was something not even mentioned, so that bad is not thought of me”. 

Then Gabriel called to her from the bottom of the valley: “Do not grieve. Your Lord has made for you a spring of water 
beneath you from which you can drink. 

@ And hold the trunk of the tree and shake it; it will instantly drop fresh ripe dates on you. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Being patient in fulfilling religious obligations is required. 

2. Allah takes care of His prophets and chosen people. 

3. One who disobeys his parents is a wretched tyrant. 

4. Righteousness towards one’s parents has a very high status with Allah, as Allah mentioned it alongside gratitude to 
Him. 

5. Allah praised those who obey Him. 






















0 So eat of the ripe dates, drink of the water, and 
be pleased with your child and do not grieve. And 
if you see any person who asks you regarding the 
child, say to him: ‘I have bound myself to silence 
for my Lord’s sake, so I will not speak to any per¬ 
son today’”. 

0 Then Mary came carrying her child to her peo¬ 
ple. Her people said to her out of shock: “O Mary, 
you have committed a grave fabricated matter, by 
bringing a child without a father. 

0 O one who resembles Aaron (a righteous man) 
in worship, your father was not an adulterer nor was 
your mother. You are from a pure household known 
to be righteous, so how can you bring a child with¬ 
out a father?” 

0 She pointed towards her son Jesus (peace be 
upon him) who was in the cradle. So the people said 
in surprise: “How can we talk to a child who is in 
the cradle?” 

<0 Jesus (peace be upon him) said: “I am the serv¬ 
ant of Allah. He gave me the Gospel and made me 
one of His prophets. 

0 And He made me a great benefit for the serv¬ 
ants wherever I am. And He ordered me to perform 
prayer and give Zakat for as long as I live. 

0 And He made me righteous to my mother. And 
He did not make me arrogant towards the obedi¬ 
ence of my Lord nor did He make me disobedient 
to her. 

(0 And safety from the satans and his helpers is on 
me on the day of my birth, the day of my death and 
the day I shall be raised on the Day of Judgment. 
The satan has no evil effect on me in these three 


frightening places”. 

0 He who is described with these qualities is Jesus, son of Mary. And this discussion is the word of truth regarding him, 
not that which is said by the misguided who doubt and disagree in his affair. 

0 It does not befit Allah to have a son, exalted and free He is from this. When He intends something, it is enough for 
Him to say regarding this thing: Be, and it most definitely becomes. So He who is like this is free from having a son. 
0 And Allah, may He be glorified, is both my Lord and your Lord, so make worship sincere for Him alone. This which 
I have mentioned to you is the straight path that leads to the pleasure of Allah. 

0 But the factions of Jews and Christians differed regarding the matter of Jesus (peace be upon him). The Jews said 
about him that he is a magician. Some Christians said about him that he is the son of Allah. Woe to those who differ re¬ 
garding him, from witnessing the great Day of Judgment, due to its scenes, reckoning and punishment. 

0 How horrible is what they will hear and see on the Day of Judgment, and how severe it will be for them. And how 
strange will be their condition which you will see. However, the oppressors in this worldly life are clearly misguided 
from the straight path. They will not prepare for the afterlife until it will suddenly come to them whilst they are in their 
wrongdoing. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The power of Allah is most perfect. All means are ineffective by themselves but only through the decree of Allah. 

2. Ordering Mary to remain silent shows the virtue of keeping quiet in certain situations. 

3. It is not permitted in our sacred law to vow to remain silent. 

4. Jesus (peace be upon him) was granted safety by Allah on the day he was bom in this life from the whispering of the 
satan, on the day of his death in the grave and on the Day of Judgment in the Hereafter. 

5. The way Jesus was created as told by the Qur’an is the definite tmth in which there is no doubt. All the false lies besides 
this do not befit the messengers. 

6. In this world, a disbeliever is deaf and blind to the tmth, but he will hear and see in the afterlife when he will see the 
punishment. However, that will never benefit him. 


















And warn the people, O Messenger, of the Day 
of Regret when the evildoer will regret his evil-do¬ 
ings and when the righteous will regret not being 
more obedient, when the scrolls of the servants will 
be wrapped, their reckoning is finished and each 
person goes towards what he had sent forward. But 
they have been deceived by their worldly life and 
are unmindful of the Hearafter, and they do not ac¬ 
cept the Day of Judgment. 

(Jl I am the one who will remain after the creation 
has perished. I shall inherit the earth and those on 
it, because they will have perished and I will remain 
after them, and I own them and do with them as I 
want. To Me alone they shall return on the Day of 
Judgment to be reckoned and recompensed. 

(Sj) And mention, O Messenger, in the Qur’an 
which has been revealed to you the story of Abra¬ 
ham (peace be upon him). He was very truthful and 
firmly believed the signs of Allah. 

@ When he said to his father Azar: “O father, why 
do you worship besides Allah an idol which does 
not hear your supplication if you supplicate it, does 
not see your worship when you worship it, does not 
remove harm from you and does not bring any ben¬ 
efit to you? 

@ O father, such knowledge has come to me 
through revelation which has not come to you, so 
follow me and I shall guide you to the straight path. 

O father, do not worship the satan by obeying 
him. The satan is disobedient to the Merciful, as 
He ordered him to prostrate to Adam but he did not 
prostrate. 

<SjS) O father, I fear a punishment from the Merciful 
will afflict you if you die in your disbelief, then you 
him”. 






OjUj i ^\fl \ i % j 

-ii ^LL j) L* \ as 1 1 

l&d\ o pi 

<$) I 

^ ^ s» ^ 'tz£- 2 _ yS _ _ J 


9 


Maryam 


308 


will be a companion to him in punishment due to your befriending 


jjj) Azar said to his son Abraham (peace be upon him): “Are you turning away from the idols I worship, O Abraham? If 
you do not stop criticising my idols, I shall pelt you with stones. Leave me for a long time. Do not talk to me or be with 
me”. 

@ Abraham (peace be upon him) said to his father: “Greetings of peace to you from me. You will not face from me what 
you dislike. I shall seek forgiveness and guidance from my Lord for you. He is very kind to me. 

(Sj) And I shall leave you and leave the idols you worship besides Allah, and I shall call upon my Lord alone, without 
associating any partner with Him. Perhaps He will not deprive me if I pray to Him, otherwise I will be unsuccessful in 
praying to Him. 

@ So when he left them and their Allahs they used to worship besides Allah, I replaced for him his loss of family, and so 
I gave him his son Isaac and I gave him his grandson Jacob. And each one of them I made a prophet. 

{§) And out of My mercy, I gave them much good alongside prophethood. And I established for them good praise which 
remains on the tongues of people. 

And mention, O Messenger, in the Qur’an revealed to you the story of Moses (peace be upon him). He was chosen 
and selected, and he was a Messenger and prophet. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The Day of Judgment will be a Day of Regret for the disbelievers and a day of happiness for the believers. 

2. A person must be respectful, kind and soft when speaking to one’s parents, and one should choose the best name when 
addressing them. 

3. Sins deprive the servant of Allah’s mercy and close its doors on him, just as obedience is the greatest means of attaining 
His mercy. 

4. Allah has promised to spread true praise of every righteous person according to his righteousness. Abraham (peace be 
upon him) and his children are among the leaders of the righteous. 




















L TJ ( ^) ^ ^ )j^ ^ l^U*- 'j ^ ^ ->oj 

j ofej^o\ (J^: * ^ ($)^v °^=^ ^ 2^3 


I i ^ 4 . ^^^ ^ > ^ ^ ^ ^ L 

jis>\ lJtU^-X^L) o | 



l V^^\\^\^\ <J ^>-1 
^c 3 r\ O^^^til-Jj^ 

j jiAcjjp ^ 0 cuL>~ ^ l$L£< 

| ^i&&^j^($) 6 b ji^ 5 ^/ 41 ^v I 

j^\ 2j^j>ci\ <aIVj ( ^ ) Ii^p<» o 


(^)l£-^ <jL j o^Wj oy.^tj \jjA^-\^j L^ jj\ oii^ 


^ ^13fcyU@ I called him from the side of the mountain that 
was on the right in relation to where Moses (peace 
be upon him) was, and I brought him near in com¬ 
munion, where Allah let him hear His speech. 

{§} I gave him, out of My grace and favour, his 
brother Aaron (peace be upon him) as a prophet, 
in answer to his prayer when he asked his Lord for 
that. 

(Sj§5 And mention, O Messenger, in the Qur’an re¬ 
vealed to you, the story of Ishmael (peace be upon 
him). He was true to his promise - whenever he 
made a promise he fulfilled it - and he was a mes¬ 
senger and prophet. 

j§S> He used to instruct his household to keep up the 
prayer and to give Zakat, and his Lord was well 
pleased with him. 

@ And mention, O Messenger, in the Qur’an which 
has been revealed to you, the story of Idris (peace 
be upon him). He was very truthful and firmly be¬ 
lieved in the signs of his Lord, and he was one of 
the prophets of Allah. 

(jp) I raised his mention by the prophethood I gave 
him and he therefore was of a high rank. 

Those who were mentioned in this Surah, begin¬ 
ning with Zachariah and ending with Idris (peace be 
upon them) are the ones whom Allah blessed with 
prophethood, from the children of Adam (peace be 
upon him), and from the children of those whom I 
carried in the Ark with Noah (peace be upon him), 
and from the children of Abraham and the children 
of Jacob (peace be upon them), and from those 
whom I blessed with guidance to Islam and whom 
I chose and made prophets. When they heard the 
verses of Allah being recited, they prostrated to Allah, weeping out of His fear. 

(Sj| After these chosen prophets came followers of evil and deviation, who neglected prayer by not offering it in the re¬ 
quired manner, and who perpetrated sins driven by their own desires such as fornication. These people will come face to 
face with evil and disappointment in Hell. 

(j§) But those who repented from their neglect and excess, who had faith in Allah, and who did righteous deeds; those who 
possess such attributes will enter Paradise and the reward of their actions will not be reduced in the least. 
dj§j) Gardens of residence and permanence, which the Merciful promised His servants in the Ghaib that He will make 
them enter them. They did not see them but they believed in them. Allah’s promise of Paradise - even though it is in the 
Ghaib - will most certainly come to pass. 

@ There they will not hear anything futile nor any obscene talk. Instead they will hear the greeting of peace to one 
another and the greeting of peace from the angels to them. They will be given whatever type of food they desire in the 
morning and evening. 

(SjS) This Paradise, described with the above attributes, is the one that I will give to those of My servants who fulfilled the 
Commandments and avoided the Prohibitions. 

After Allah, may He be glorified, mentioned the reward of those who were mindful of Him, He mentioned that Allah-con- 
sciousness is to implement His command in the following verse. 

@ And say - O Gabriel - to Muhammad (peace be upon him): The angels do not descent of their own accord. They only 
descend at Allah’s command. Everything ahead of us in the Hearafter, everything behind us in the world, and everything 
in between the world and the Hearafter, all belong to Allah. Your Lord, O Messenger, would not forget anything. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. A preacher is always in need of assistants to help him in his call. 2. Proof of the attribute of speech for Allah, the Exalt¬ 
ed. 3. Being true to one’s promise is praiseworthy and is the character trait of the prophets and messengers. The opposite, 
which is to breaks one’s promise, is blameworthy. 4. The angels are Allah’s messengers who bring revelation. They do 
not descend on any of the prophets or messengers from amongst humans except with Allah’s instruction. 


Maryam 















j] 








rfiJL |LicJ 0 ^x£\ Jh£$ 


IjL?^ jj^S-o^ 0 


]jJ^lyj&\ J\s c^o \ ^ 

0 G jo 

0tj^j ^^jj>~\ p-fis Q 




@ He is the Creator of the heavens and the Cre¬ 
ator of the earth and their Owner and Controller. 

He is also the Creator, Owner and Controller of 
everything in between them so worship Him alone, 
for He alone is deserving of worship. Remain firm 
in worshipping Him, for He has no likeness or part¬ 
ner who shares this worship with Him. 

{§} The disbeliever, who rejects resurrection, mock¬ 
ingly says: What, when I die, I will come out of my 
grave alive for a second time? This is far-fetched. 

?5p Does this person who rejects resurrection not 
remember that I created him previously when he 
was nothing? He can then use the first creation as 
evidence for the second creation, even though the 
second creation will be simpler and easier? 

@ By your Lord, O Messenger, I will take them out 
of their graves to the place of gathering along with 
the satans who had misled them. Then I will push 
them towards the doors of Hell, humiliated and on 
their knees. 

I shall violently pull out from each of the groups 
of deviation those who were most disobedient, and 
these are their leaders. 

{§} Then I know best about those who most deserve 
to enter the Fire and endure and suffer its heat. 

@ There is not one among you - O people - who 
will not cross over the bridge placed over Hell. 

Your Lord has made this crossing an incumbent de¬ 
cree and no one can push back His decree. @ Then 
after this crossing over the bridge, I will deliver 
those who were mindful of their Lord by fulfilling 
His instructions and avoiding His prohibitions, and 
I will leave the wrongdoers kneeling on their knees 

without being able to escape from it. @ When My clear revelations to My Messenger are recited to people, the dis¬ 
believers say to the believers: Which of our two parties is better in residence and dwelling and superior in assembly 
and gathering: Our party or your party? @ How many were the nations that I destroyed before these disbelievers who 
are proud of their material superiority, who had surpassed them in riches and in their outward appearance due to their 
expensive clothing and their bodily luxuries. @ Say - O Messenger: The Merciful will grant respite to those wallowing 
in their misguidance, so that they fall further into it, until when they see what they have been warned about- either the 
swift punishment in this world or the punishment postponed to the Day of Judgment - then they will realise who is worse 
situated and who has the weakest forces. Is it their party or the party of the believers. @ In contrast to the respite granted 
to those people so that they fall further into misguidance, Allah gives more guidance and obedience to those who are 
guided. Righteous deeds that lead to perpetual happiness are more beneficial - in the sight of your Lord, O messenger, in 
terms of their recompense and have a better outcome. 

Beneficial Points: 

1. Believers must busy themselves with what they have been instructed and be consistent in that within the limits of 
their capacity. 2. The gathering of all creation for the reckoning is an established matter that will take place after they 
are resurrected from their graves. 3. Allah will present the disbelievers kneeling on their knees around Hell. Due to the 
severity of the terrors they will face, they will not be able to stand. 4. Allah will take out from every community and from 
the followers of every false religion those who were the most insolent and disobedient, who are the leaders, to multiply 
the punishment for them. 5. All created beings will arrive at the Fire, i.e. pass over the bridge without entering the fire. 
This is something that will most certainly occur. 6. Allah will save those who were mindful of Him and will release them 
from the fire of Hell. He will let the disbelievers remain there forever. 7. The correct standards and concepts of religion 
differ from the ideas of those who are ignorant and the lay people. 8. Allah destroyed many communities and groups who 
had more luxuries and wealth on account of their disbelief. 9. Allah leaves the person who is drowned in misguidance 
and rooted in disbelief, in the excess of his ignorance and disbelief, so that his delusion is prolonged and this makes his 
punishment more severe. 10. Allah keeps the believers firm on guidance and increases His grant of success and help to 
them. He sends down verses that become a means for an increase of their conviction as a reward for them. 




ts J 0 \ JCar 

















© Have you, O messenger, seen the man who de¬ 
nies My evidences, rejects My warning and says: If 
I die and am resurrected, I will certainly be given a 
lot of wealth and children? 

© Does he have knowledge of the Ghaib and there¬ 
fore he said that with some proof? Or does he have 
a pledge with his Lord to enter him into paradise 
and to give him wealth and children? 

© The matter is not as he claimed. I will certainly 
record what he says and does; and I will give him 
a punishment over and above his punishment be¬ 
cause of the falsehood that he claims. 

© I shall inherit the wealth and children he leaves 
behind after I destroy him, and he will come to Us 
on the Day of Judgement all alone, with the wealth 
and fame that he enjoyed having been taken away 
from him. 

© The idolaters have taken for themselves things 
of worship other than Allah, so that they may be a 
support and source of assistance for them. 

© The matter is not as they claimed. These things 
that they worshipped besides Allah will reject the 
idolaters’ worship of them on the Day of Judgment. 
They will disassociate themselves from them and 
become their enemies. 

© Have you, O Messenger, not seen that I sent the 
satans and gave them authority over the disbeliev¬ 
ers inciting them to commit sins and prevent others 
from Allah’s religion? 

© Do not be hasty, O Messenger, in asking Allah 
to punish them quickly. I am keeping a close record 
of their lives, until when the period of their respite 
comes to an end, I will punish them with what they 


deserve. 

© Remember, O Messenger, the Day of Judgment when I will gather those who were mindful of their Lord - by fulfilling 
His instructions and avoiding His prohibitions - to their Lord as a delegation that is honoured and respected. 

*>j I will drive the disbelievers to Hell thirsty. 

© These disbelievers will not have the power to intercede for one another, except for those who had taken a pledge with 
Allah in the world by having faith in Him and in His messengers. 

© The Jews, the Christians and some of the idolaters said: The Merciful has taken a son. 

© You - who say this - have indeed brought something monstrous. 

© The heavens almost rupture because of this detested statement, the earth almost splits, and the mountains almost fall 
in ruins. 

© All of this because they have attributed a son to the Merciful. Allah is high above that by far. 

5. It is not befitting of the Merciful to take a son as He is pure of that. 

© There is no angel, human being or jinn in the heavens and earth but that he will come in submission to his Lord on 
the Day of Judgment. 

§5 He has full knowledge of them and has numbered them exactly. Nothing of theirs is hidden from Him. 

© Each one of them will come to Him on the Day of Judgment alone, without any helper or any wealth. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The verses indicate the absurdity of the disbeliever and the naivety of his thinking by his having sweet hopes but he 
will find the complete opposite in the world of the Hearafter. 

2. Allah has given authority to the satans over the disbelievers by their misleading them, inciting them to do evil and 
removing them from obedience to sin. 

3. The people of virtue, knowledge and righteousness will intercede with Allah’s permission on the Day of Judgment. 


















r 







{§} Those who have faith in Allah, and do righteous 
actions that Allah is pleased with, Allah will create 
for them love by His loving them and by making 
them beloved to His servants. 

@ We have made this Qur’an easy by revealing it 
in your own language, O Messenger, so that you 
may bring glad news to those who are mindful by 
fulfilling My instructions and avoiding My prohi¬ 
bitions, and so that you may warn a people who 
are harsh in disputing and stubborn in accepting the 
truth. 

@ How many communities I have destroyed be¬ 
fore your people! Do you perceive a single one of 
those communities today, or hear any sound from 
them? What afflicted them may afflict others when 
Allah gives permission. 

Surah Taha 

^ Themes of the Surah: 

Encouragement of the Prophet (peace be upon him) 
to carry on and be steadfast in the mission. 

® Explanation: 

(JfJ) This surah begins with the disconnected letters, 
the explanation for which has already preceeded in 
Surah Baqarah. 

@ I have not revealed the Qur’an to you, O Mes¬ 
senger, to become distressed by your people’s turn¬ 
ing away from having faith in it. 

We only revealed it to be a reminder for those 
whom Allah has blessed so that they fear Him. 

© It was sent down by Allah, Who created the earth 
and the high heavens. It is thus a grand Qur’an, as 
it was sent down by a Grand Being. 

CfJ) The Merciful who established Himself on the Throne, in a meaning that is befitting for His Majesty, may He be glo¬ 
rified. 

© Everything in the heavens and on earth, and all that is beneath the soil, belong to Him alone, may He be glorified. He 
created, owns and controls all of it. 

@ If you, O Messenger, proclaim the word or conceal it, He, may He be glorified, knows all of that. He knows the secrets 
and what is even more hidden, such as thoughts in the mind. Nothing is hidden from Him. 

@ Allah, there is no being deserving of worship besides Him. To Him alone belong the perfect Names that have reached 
the most complete level of perfection and excellence. 

Since the Prophet (peace be upon him) was distressed at his people’s rejecting the message, he is consoled by the account 
of Moses (peace be upon him) in the Ayah: 

| The story of Moses, son of Imran, (peace be upon him), has come to you - O Messenger. 

@ When he saw a fire whilst travelling and he said to his family: Stay here—I can see a fire. Maybe I can bring you a 
flaming brand from it or find somebody to guide me to the path. 

Cy} When he came to the fire, Allah, may He be glorified, called out to him saying: O Moses. 

@ I am your Lord. Take off your shoes in preparation for your conversation with me. You are in the purified valley (of 
Tuwa.) 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The revelation of the grand Qur’an was not to cause hardship to the soul in worship or to make it taste great difficulty. 
It is only a book that serves as a reminder, from which those who fear their Lord benefit. 

2. Allah has mentioned the creation and the instruction together. Just as there is wisdom in the creation, similarly He only 
instructs and prohibits with justice and wisdom. 

3. It is a man’s duty to provide maintenance for his family (wife) in the form of food, clothing, accommodation and the 
means of warmth when it is cold. 




Taha 


312 
























afei *~14> 


\r 


*Lj) 2 ^ 5lC£) L£^= = yi.a3L^J 1 i' jd^j l^-LA 

j $ ^ 

cfAS t ^ ) 

^ 3 « ($) c£^ 4^)4* I^^jJLaIj 

5| 4a jj >-\ s4W444^443?45 
.4 Jo p_4>^]j (^) c3j v 3 ^ \j&j^u£ La J^jy^^j <^Ja}£^)}_j 


4L> 4j 2 j4 

JlJ 0t^j^6j^^ls^ *<I>2 

^SjJi^U-lj(^J(_£ / 2\ uj^l} ($)c 5jX^> <X FLr^ <4p 

A^S 4l$) c£^ c| &/^j(Ql£j3 2^3 -ii^^)<j4 


@ I have chosen you - O Moses - to convey My 
message, so listen to what I reveal to you. 

@ I am Allah; there is no being deserving of wor¬ 
ship but Me. So worship Me alone and perform the 
prayer in the perfect manner so that you may re¬ 
member Me in it. 

@ The Hour is most definitely coming and it will 
certainly occur. I almost keep it hidden so that 
no creation knows its time, but they are aware of 
its signs by the information given to them by the 
Prophet sent to them, so that each soul is rewarded 
for what it did, whether good or evil. 

@ Do not let those disbelievers who do not believe 
in it and who follow their unlawful desires distract 
you from believing in it and preparing for it by 
doing righteous action and so bring you to ruin on 
account of it. 

djj) What is that in your right hand, O Moses? 

<3 Moses (peace be upon him) said: It is my stick: 

I lean on it when walking, I beat down tree leaves 
with it for my sheep, and it has many other uses 
besides those I mentioned. 

(Sj} Allah said: Throw it down, O Moses. 

<0 Moses threw it down and it turned into a snake 
moving swiftly. 

{§} Allah said to Moses (peace be upon him): Take 
hold of the stick and do not fear its having turned 
into a snake. When you take hold of it I will return 
it to its former state. 

@ Now press your hand to your side and it will 
come out white, without any leprosy; that is another 
sign for you. 

Jj) I have shown you these two signs - O Moses - to show you some of My greatest signs that indicate My Power and that 
you are a messenger sent by Allah. 

® Go - O Moses - to Pharaoh, for he has overstepped the bounds in disbelief and rebellion against Allah. 

Cj) Moses (peace be upon him) said: Lord, expand my breast for me so that I can bear the difficulty, 
dj) Make my task easy. 

@) Give me the ability to speak eloquently. 

So that they understand my speech when I convey Your message to them. 

Give me a helper from my family who will assist me in my affairs. 

Aaron, the son of Imran, my brother. 

Strengthen my determination through him. 

And make him my partner in the mission. 

5 So that we can glorify You much. 

8) And remember You much. 

You are always watching over us. Nothing of ours is hidden from You. 

Allah said: I have granted your request, O Moses. 

I had favoured you another time. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The necessity of listening properly in important matters, the most important of which is revelation sent down from 
Allah. 

2. The first revelation sent to Moses contained two principles of faith, which are: Acknowledgment of Allah’s oneness 
and faith in the Hour (the rising) and the most important religious obligation after faith which is prayer. 

3. Cooperation amongst those calling to Allah is necessary to achieve the objective. Allah made for Moses his brother 
Aaron a prophet to assist him in carrying out the mission. 

4. The importance of a preacher having the skill to make those who are called understand. 


A3343 (^) ctu]_ QT) jyp Joj (Aj 

(™) <£44>4aa c4j j\ 




















*J4r 




aJ& js\& d\(Qz£z$* tiL) ^1 1 

c^]jj^S^ ojS^\j A^d\sj^5\^ |j| 



(Sj) When We inspired your mother by that which 
was a means by which Allah protected you from 
Pharaoh’s plot. 

(jp I had instructed her when I inspired her: Throw 
your child after he is born into the chest and then 
place the chest into the river. The river will cast him 
on to the bank by My command, and he will be tak¬ 
en in by an enemy of Mine and his, who is Pharaoh. 

I placed on you love from Me, so that people love 
you, and so that you are reared under My watchful 
eye, protection and care. 

@ When your sister went out following the chest 
wherever it went, and she said to those who took 
it: Shall I show you someone who will take care of 
him, nurse him and rear him. I then favoured you 
by returning you to your mother so that she could 
rejoice by your return to her and not grieve over 
you. Then You killed the copt whom you punched, 
but We favoured you by saving you from difficulty. 

And we helped you time after time from every test 
that you faced. You then left and stayed among the 
people of Madyan for years, then you came at the 
time that was specified for you to come to be spo¬ 
ken to O Moses. 

@ I have selected you as My messenger to convey 
to people the revelation I sent to you. 

(S§p Go, you - O Moses - and your brother Aaron, 
with My signs indicating Allah’s Power and One¬ 
ness, and do not slacken in calling towards Me and 
in remembering Me. 

(jp Go to Pharaoh, for he has overstepped the 
bounds in disbelief and rebellion against Allah. 

(SjS) Speak to him gently without harshness, in the 
hope that he may take heed, fear Allah and repent. 

Moses and Aaron peace be upon them) said: We fear that he will quickly punish us before we can deliver Your mes¬ 
sage to him, or that he will exceed the limit in oppressing us by killing us or otherwise. 

dj) Allah said to them: Do not be afraid, I am with you both with My help and support. I hear and see everything that 
occurs between you and him. 

dJjD So go to him and tell him: We are the messengers of your Lord - O Pharaoh - so send the Israelites with us and do not 
punish them by killing their sons and letting their women live. We have brought to you a sign from your Lord proving our 
truthfulness. Safety from Allah’s punishment is for those who have faith and follow Allah’s guidance. 
dj| Allah has revealed to us that punishment in this world and the afterlife falls on whoever rejects the signs of Allah and 
turns his back on what the messengers brought. 

dSp Pharaoh said, in denial of what they brought: Who then is your Lord, whom you claim has sent you to me, O Moses? 

Moses said: Our Lord is the One Who gave everything the shape and form suitable for it, and then He guided all cre¬ 
ated things to what they were created for. 

dj|) Pharaoh said: What about the previous communities who had disbelieved? 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Allah’s complete care for Moses (peace be upon him) and all messengers and prophets. Their successors also receive 
some of this care in accordance with their states with Allah. 

2. Those who follow the straight path and adopt the clear sacred law will be safe in this world and the Hearafter. 

3. Part of the general guidance for all created things is that every created thing strives towards the benefits for which it 
was created and towards warding off harm from itself. 

4. The verses show the virtue of instructing the good and prohibiting evil and that should be done through gentle speech 
by the person who has power and whose protection is guaranteed. 

5. The person who is right must listen to the speech of the person who is false and respond to him without offence or 
alienation. 

6. Allah alone possesses knowledge of the Ghaib in the past, present and future. 


££j\j *SLZ>\ 

■?> ^ ^ ^ fr 


Taha 


314 






















vJ4,i 


^aX^=== a (^) llslSj (V*!^ 9 *)\ 24 j cts ^.LaJlll 

14^ *{$) ^' JS%^$ ^5 jo^l^'feS 

J\S {^) ^ fcjj | 




oi? '^3 (^) i ^j-^ j j 


i * ' 


J j^-4^l ]\S (^)^ j±->js - A ^ ^^ J > t 3 <, 

^>\-x_cl^tL^ 

I \ l *<>'"*' ^ ^ 5 \^j . v ^rf ^ <' 

jJj-^lJ 1l_^V^3( ^ )(3 7O) ('_y*^te~J3 9 

° ^ ^ ^ ^ 0 9 ^ I** ^ 

Js^o^ o!^^($)l£>>^^ 




Jo^j 


&>'Ot\ 


<0 Moses (peace be upon him) said to Pharaoh: 
The knowledge of what those communities did is 
with my Lord, recorded in the Preserved Tablet. My 
Lord does not err in His Knowledge of things nor 
does He forget anything. 

@ My Lord is the One who made the earth spread 
out for you to live on and made for you on it path¬ 
ways to travel on. He sent down rain water from 
the sky and with that water He brings forth every 
kind of plant. 

@ Eat - O people - of the pure things that I have 
brought forth for you, and graze your cattle. In the 
favours that are mentioned there are signs of Allah’s 
Power and Oneness for people of understanding. 
@ From the soil of the earth I created your father, 
Adam (peace be upon him), into it I shall return 
you by your being buried therein when you pass 
away, and from it I shall take you out you a second 
time when you will be resurrected on the Day of 
Judgment. 

{§} I showed Pharaoh all of My nine signs. He saw 
them all but denied them and refused to respond by 
having faith in Allah. 

{§p Pharaoh said: Have you come to remove us from 
Egypt with the magic that you brought, O Moses, 
so that you can gain control over it? 

(j| We will certainly bring to, O Moses, magic sim¬ 
ilar to yours, so make an appointment between you 
and us at a specified time and place, which neither 
of us will fail to keep, and let the place be a central 
and even place to both groups. 

@ Moses (peace be upon him) said to Pharaoh: The 
appointment between you and us will be on the day 
of the festival when people will gather to celebrate the festival in the morning. 

fj) Pharaoh went back and gathered his plots and tricks. Then he came at the specified time and place for the contest. 

Moses said advising Pharaoh’s magicians: Beware, do not invent lies against Allah through the magic by means of 
which you deceive people, or He will eliminate you with a punishment from Him. Whoever invents lies against Allah is 
a loser. 

@ The magicians argued among themselves when they heard what Moses (peace be upon him) had to say and they 
conferred secretly. 

@ The magicians said to one another secretly: Moses and Aaron are both magicians. Their intention is to drive you out 
of Egypt with the magic that they brought and put an end to your superior way of life and sublime religion. 

@) So make a firm decision and do not differ therein. Then go forward in rows and throw down what you have all at once. 
Whoever defeats his opponent today has attained his objective. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. One of Allah’s favours is that He rolled out the earth like a spread and made it firm so that people can settle on it and 
it is suitable for life. 

2. Bringing forth various types of plants of varying colours from the earth is a clear sign of Allah’s Power and the exist¬ 
ence of the Creator. 

3. The verses mentioned two clear logical evidences for resurrection: Bringing forth plants from the earth after its demise 
and bringing forth people from it when they were first created. 

4. The people of intelligence are the ones who benefit from the verses and who consider it carefully. 

5. Pharaoh’s disbelief was one of obstinacy, because he had seen the signs with his own eyes and was convinced of them 
deep within himself. 

6. Moses selected the day of the festival so that Allah’s word will be supreme, His religion will be victorious and disbelief 
will be repressed before all people in a public place so that the news of it spreads. 

7. The distinguishing feature of the prophets was their sincerity in calling towards Allah and their seizing the suitable 
opportunity to announce their invitation. 















| J* ^ 3 $ <50 Is 

^ <j£ ^j 3 \ Xlc~ tals jy*^ 

|i%i^\f * ^ “" "" ' 



1 jiV & J d~^5jc^£ J\i(£) i&ty_j l)j^j» c/^j^\^% j 

lP^j\^>C^\ ^j\s>r J|j05L^Sjj •~-XS^lf^X^r}'J 
&&'XSr<X&&£$> -)\} $ 0 ^^L\j^jS\Wi 

9 ^s s' y& s' ”fr 9 r^s ^0 a 

Vy ^23 


Z )\C ji\ o£34 

^Ajlj^j^j (^) ^^)}j L&^C 


© The magicians said to Moses (peace be upon 
him): O Moses, you have one of two options: Either 
you will be the first to throw down the magic you 
have, or we will be the first to do so. 

© Moses (peace be upon him) said: Rather, you 
throw what you have first. So they threw what they 
had and suddenly their ropes and sticks that they 
had thrown seemed to Moses, because of their mag¬ 
ic, to be snakes moving quickly. 

© Moses was inwardly alarmed thinking that they 
would come for him. 

© Allah said to Moses (peace be upon him) re¬ 
assuring him: Do not be afraid of what they seem 
to you. You - O Moses - have the upper hand over 
them and you will be victorious. 

© Throw down the stick that is in your right hand: 
it will turn into a snake and swallow up the mag¬ 
ic they have produced. They have only produced 
a magic trick, and a magician will not achieve his 
objective, wherever he may be. 

© So Moses threw down his stick and it turned 
into a snake and swallowed up what the magicians 
had produced. The magicians then all prostrated to 
Allah once they came to know that what Moses had 
was not magic, but it was from Allah and they said: 

We have faith in the Lord of Moses and Aaron, the 
Lord of all created things. 

© Pharaoh said in rejection of the faith of the ma¬ 
gicians and as threat to them: Have you believed in 
Moses before I have given you permission to do so? 

Moses must be your master - O magicians - who 
taught you magic. I shall certainly cut off from each 
one of you one hand and foot from opposite sides, 
then I will crucify your bodies on the trunks of palm trees until you die. You will become a lesson for others and you will 
know then which of us has the fiercer and more lasting punishment: I or the Lord of Moses? 

© The magicians said to Pharaoh: We shall never prefer following you - O Pharaoh - to following the clear signs that 
have come to us. We will never prefer you to Allah Who created us. So do whatever you want to us: you only have power 
over us in this present transient life, and your power will soon vanish. 

© We believe in our Lord, with the hope that He will erase from us our past sins of disbelief and other sins, and that 
He will erase from us the sin of magic that you forced us to learn, practice and challenge Moses with. Allah has a better 
reward than what you promise us and His punishment is more lasting than the punishment you threaten us with. 

© The matter and gist is that those who come to their Lord on the Day of Judgment as disbelievers will enter the fire to 
remain there forever. Therein they will not die and be relieved of its torment, nor will they live a pleasant life. 

© Those who come to their Sustainer on the Day of Judgement as believers who had done righteous actions, then such 
people will be rewarded with lofty abodes and high ranks in Paradise. 

© Those ranks are Gardens of Eternity with streams flowing under their palaces, and there they will stay there forever. 
That is the reward of those who purify themselves from disbelief and sins. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Good manners is of benefit in this world and the Hearafter. Since the magicians gave Moses the option to throw first 
or to let them throw first, this brought them the benefit of being blessed with faith. 2. A magician will never succeed or 
survive wherever he may go or practice his tricks. He will never obtain his objective through magic, whether good or bad. 
3. An intelligent person should compare the pleasures of world against the pleasures of the afterlife and the punishment 
of this world against the punishment of the Hearafter. 4. Faith does miracles. The faith of the magicians was more firm 
than the mountains and therefore the punishment of the world was easy for them to bear and they were not concerned 
by Pharaoh’s threats. 5. The habit of the transgressors is that they threaten the people of truth with severe punishment in 
order to humiliate and disgrace them. 6. The rejecting disbeliever in Hell will neither live nor die. 7. The reward of those 
who purify themselves from disbelief and sins will be gardens of eternity that have rivers of wine, honey, milk and water 
flowing under their abodes. 
























w 





And I revealed to Moses to take My servants by 
night from Egypt so that nobody notices them, and 
make for them a dry path in the sea after striking 
the sea with the staff, safely without fearing Phar¬ 
aoh and his people catching up with you nor being 
scared of drowning in the sea. 

Then Pharoah, accompanied by his armies, fol¬ 
lowed them. Then he and his armies were engulfed 
by part of the sea, the reality of which only Allah 
knows. They all drowned and perished, whilst Mo¬ 
ses and those with him were saved. 

@ And Pharaoh misguided his people by making 
disbelief appear good to them and by deceiving 
them through falsehood, and he did not direct them 
towards the path of guidance. 

And I said to the Children of Israel after saving 
them from Pharoah and his armies: “O Children of 
Israel, I saved you from your enemy, and I prom¬ 
ised you that I will speak to Moses to the right of 
the valley by Mount Tur, and I sent down to you 
whilst you were wandering food you can eat which 
is sweet and resembles gum, and birds which re¬ 
semble quails.” 

(JJS) Eat the wholesome lawful foods I have provided 
you and do not go beyond what I have made lawful 
to you, so you consume what I have made forbid¬ 
den for you, otherwise My anger will fall on you. 
Whoever My anger falls upon will be destroyed and 
fall into Hell. 

@ And I am extremely forgiving and pardoning to 
one who repents to Me, does good deeds and is then 
firm on the truth. 

(jp And what has made you rush from your people, 

O Moses, leaving them behind?” 

(jp Moses (peace be upon him) said: “Here they are behind me. They shall catch up with me. I preceded my people in 
coming to You, so that you become pleased with me for coming towards You quickly”. 

(SjS) Allah said: “I have tested your people whom you left behind through worship of the calf. Samiri called them to wor¬ 
shipping it and he has misguided them through this”. 

(jP Moses returned to his people, angered by their worship of the calf and grieving over them. Moses (peace be upon him) 
said: “My people, did Allah not make you a good promise that He will send the Torah to you and enter you into paradise? 
Had a long time passed upon you that you forgot? Or did you intend through this action of yours that your Lord’s anger 
should descend upon you and His punishment befall you, and this is why you broke your promise to me to stay firm on 
obedience until I return to you?” 

jjj) Moses’ people said: “We did not break your promise, O Moses, by our own choice, but rather by compulsion. We car¬ 
ried large weights of the jewellery of Pharaoh’s people and we threw them into a ditch to get rid of them. But as we threw 
them into the ditch, Samiri threw into it some dust he had from the hoof of the horse of Gabriel (peace be upon him)”. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. It is Allah’s custom to take retribution from the wrongdoers through which the believers’ hearts are relieved, they find 
solace and the anger of their hearts is removed. 2. Destroying is Allah’s custom as an end result of disbelief, misguidance 
and not following Allah’s guidance. 3. Whoever treads the straight path, follows the Noble Messenger, follows the firm 
religion, Allah forgives his sins and pardons his previous mistakes and persistent disobedience. 4. A tyrant is a misfortune 
for himself and his people, because he leads them astray from guidance, and he does not guide them towards good or 
salvation. 5. Blessings require protection and gratitude which brings more, whereas rejecting them necessitates Allah’s 
anger descending. 6. Allah is always Forgiving to one who repents from associating partners with Allah, disbelief and 
sinning, who believes in Him and does good deeds and who then remains steadfast on the truth until he dies on it. 

7. Although hastiness disliked in general, promptness is praiseworthy in religious matters. 8. Moses (peace be upon him) 
had every right to return to his people in extreme anger and grief, due to the worship of the calf they committed after him. 





















n a 






■l 


l&)5 (^) &J* 13^1 


o>* Jy-> o^ <l^Jf>-^lX s^j^j 

si ^4j ]jJ^2rij^ lij Oj^2J 



(Sp So Samiri took out from this jewellery of the 
Israelites a lifeless body of a calf, which made a 
noise like that of a cow. Those amongst them who 
had been tempted by Samiri’s action said: “This is 
your Allah and the Allah of Moses which he forgot 
and left here”. 

@ Do these people who were tempted by the calf 
and then worshipped it not see that the calf does 
not speak or respond to them, nor does it have the 
ability to remove harm from them or others or bring 
benefit for itself or others? 

((§§) Aaron had said to them before Moses returned 
to them: “The making of the calf from gold and 
its mooing are only to test you, to distinguish the 
believer from the disbeliever. And your Lord, O 
people, is Allah, so follow me by worshipping Him 
alone and obey my command to leave worshipping 
others besides Him”. 

(j§j) Those who had been tempted through worship 
of the calf said: “We will continue worshipping it 
until Moses returns to us”. 

{jp Moses said to his brother Aaron: “What was it 
that stopped you, when you saw them go astray by 
worshipping the calf besides Allah, 

(jp from leaving them and joining me? Did you dis¬ 
obey my order to you when I made you my deputy 
over them?” 

(jp When Moses took his brother by his beard and 
head, dragging him and scolding him for what he 
did, Aaron said to him, seeking his compassion: 

“Do not hold my beard and the hair on my head, for 
I have a reason for staying with them. I feared if I 
leave them alone they will disperse, then you will 
say I split them apart and that I did not maintain your bequest regarding them”. 

@ Moses (peace be upon him) said to Samiri: “What is your matter, O Samiri? What made you do what you did?” 

(jp) Samiri said to Moses (peace be upon him): “I saw what they did not see: I saw Gabriel on a horse, so I took a handful 
of soil from the footsteps of his horse and threw it on melted jewellery which was moulded into the form of a calf. From 
this, the body of a calf with a mooing sound was formed. And this is how my soul made what I did appealing to me”. 

(jjD Moses (peace be upon him) said to Samiri: “Go, for it is written for you that you will say as long as you live: T am 
not to touch or be touched’. You will live as an outcast, and you have a promised time on the Day of Judgment in which 
you will be reckoned and punished. Allah will never break this promise with you. And look towards your calf which you 
had made your Allah and which you continued to worship besides Allah. We shall burn it in a fire until it melts, then we 
shall scatter it into the sea until no trace of it remains. 

(jp Your true Allah, O people, is Allah only, besides whom there is no true Allah. He has encompassed everything in His 
knowledge; only He knows everything and nothing escapes His awareness”. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Deceiving people by distorting the truth is the way of the misguided. 

2. Anger when the sacred laws of Allah are violated is commendable. 

3. These verses contain the basis for exiling and leaving people of innovation and disobedience, and that they should not 
be associated with. 

4. These verses show it is necessary to contemplate and recognise Allah through His actions in the Universe. 


i|6 w 


Taha 


318 


1 


















j 4J9S 'jjr* 





b _3 j lcS >^ y ^\ l_f (^}|^=0 

rt-i-^ ( jfr ) AaAJ^ ^ ^ £ X-gJ sL^_9 jJsf f a\o- Q 

Ol^Sl 

}\j2^fl)L 



y c r^ ^<< 



^4jj 






Cp Just as I related to you, O Messenger, the sto- 
jp ry of Moses, Pharaoh and their people, I relate to 
you the incidents of the prophets and nations before 
you, so that they are a solace for you. And I have 
given you from Myself a Qur’an through which 
those who seek reminders are reminded. 

(jfl Whoever turns away from this Qur’an which 
has been revealed to you and does not believe in it 
and act accordingly will come on the Day of Judg¬ 
ment carrying great sin and deserving a painful 
punishment. 

Ip Staying in this punishment forever. How awful 
a burden they will be carrying on the day of judg¬ 
ment. 

HI The day when the angel will blow in the trumpet 
a second time for the resurrection, and I shall gather 
the disbelievers on this day, blue-eyed, due to their 
complexion and eyes changing out of the severe 
horrors of the afterlife they will face. 

(jj|| They will talk to one another quietly saying: 
“You did not stay in the Transitory Stage after death 
except ten nights”. 

|f| I know best what they secretly say amongst 
themselves, with none of it escaping Me, when the 
most intelligent of them says: “You did not stay in 
the Transitory Stage except for one day, no more”. 
HI They ask you, O Messenger, regarding the con¬ 
dition of the mountains on the Day of Judgment. 
Say to them: My Lord will pull out the mountains 
from their roots and scatter them, then they will be¬ 
come dust. 

(|f| He will then leave the earth which used to carry 
them as flat, with no buildings or vegetation on it. 
Ijp O onlooker, you will not see on the earth, due to it being totally flat, any curve, elevation or dip. 

HI On that day, people will follow the sound of the caller towards the gathering place. There will be nothing to divert 
them from following it. The voices will silence for the Merciful, out of fear, so you will not hear on this day except 
whispering. 

On this great day, no intercession from any intercessor will benefit, except one whom Allah allows to intercede and 
Allah is pleased with what he says in intercession. @ Allah knows what people will face in the final hour and He knows 
what they will have left behind in their worldly life. All the servants together cannot encompass the knowledge of Allah’s 
being and His qualities. @ The faces of the servants will humble and surrender before the Eternal One who does not die 
and who takes care of the affairs of His servants by managing and administering them. And the one Who carried sin has 
lost, due to his taking himself to places of destruction. (j!J) Whoever does good deeds whilst believing in Allah and His 
messengers will attain his full reward, and will neither fear injustice by being punished for a sin he did not commit nor a 
decrease in the reward of his good deeds, (jji) I have revealed the Qur’an in clear Arabic just as I revealed the stories of 
the previous prophets, and I have explained in it different warnings of threat and fear, in the hope they will fear Allah or 
that the admonition of the Qur’an will cause them to reflect. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The stories of the Qur’an which mentions the incidents of the nations before are a lesson and admonition for all people. 

2. All of the Qur’an is a reminder and lesson for nations, tribes and individuals, and dignity and honour for mankind. 

3. Intercession will not benefit anyone, besides the intercession of one whom the Merciful allows and whom He approves 
to speak for intercession. 4. The Qur’an discloses the horrors of the Day of Judgment, and the earthquakes and shakings 
which will occur in it. 5. The Qur’an comprises that which is sufficient for all levels of people. 6. The Qur’an comprises 
rulings whose beauty and perfection is attested to by the intellect and human nature. 7. Amongst the etiquette of dealing 
with the Qur’an is to receive it with acceptance, submission and respect, to take direction through its light towards the 
straight path, and to devote oneself to it through learning and teaching. 8. The wrongdoers will regret on the Day of 
Judgment because of wasting much time, spending it absentmindedly and in play, turning away from what benefits them 
and occupying themselves with what harms them. 


1 


Taha 

















ij Jl5^^4^ I 

I^jJS j^(^)l^J_Pj4ix^-^J ^^^JJ^<J£>o\*^ 

®$J^S ^xS^X/i\ji4^ s^^fuji 
I Ai^oi 

<4U-*j Yy*J^ V\ J\S 

A^M <3_>L? lA-A^-^^; | 

j l^^UaJfc\ J\i (J^) L$AJfcJ ^k>cl)\23 jAjJ)<£E^\Jo (uj) j 

^ ^ a ; ^ ^ 

OAjk 

< ^»t 

Ofr^'O^ 

I^aI^) ^ j b^i^J ^O-*^ j ^ 



@ Allah is High above and Exalted from what the 
idolaters describe Him with of deficiencies and 
from what they attribute as partners to Him. He is 
the Majestic King, to whom belongs the kingdom 
of everything, and who is the Truth and speaks 
the truth. Do not hasten, O Messenger, in reciting 
the Qur’an with Gabriel before it is completely 
conveyed to you, and say: O Lord, increase me in 
knowledge, on top of what You have already taught 
me. 

After Allah mentioned the story of Moses and what 
it comprises, namely the turning away of Pharaoh 
and the negligence of the Israelites, He mentioned 
the story of Adam (peace be upon him), to encour¬ 
age those who have forgotten to return to Allah’s 
obedience. 

|!| And I enjoined on Adam beforehand not to eat 
of the tree, and I forbade him from this and ex¬ 
plained to him its consequences. But he forgot the 
instruction, ate of the tree and was unable to resist 
it. And I did not see in him resolve to observe what 
I enjoined. 

|j| And remember, O Messenger, when I said to the 
angels: “Prostrate to Adam as a greeting”. All of 
them prostrated besides Iblis, who was with them 
but not from them. He refused to prostrate out of 
arrogance. 

|IJ So I said: “O Adam, Iblis is your enemy and 
your wife’s enemy, so let him not take you and your 
wife out of paradise, by obeying him in what he 
whispers, in which case you will bear difficulties 
and hardship. 

@) It is Allah’s responsibility towards you that He 
will feed you, so you will not get hungry, and to clothe you, so you will not be naked. 

fij And to give you water so that you do not get thirsty, and to shade you so that the heat of the sun does not affect you”. 
(f§| But the satan whispered to Adam saying: “Shall I show you a tree that whoever eats from it will never die, but in fact 
remain forever, and possess an everlasting kingdom that will never break or end?” 

|I| Then Adam and Eve ate of the tree they were forbidden to eat from, then their private areas became exposed to them 
after they were hidden, and they began to pluck the leaves of the trees of paradise and cover their private areas with them. 
Adam opposed the command of his Lord, as he did not comply with His order of refraining from eating of the tree, and 
so he trespassed the bounds towards that which was not allowed for him. 
f|| Then Allah chose him, accepted his repentance and enabled him to be guided. 

(Jl| Allah said to Adam and Eve: “Both of you and Iblis, descend from paradise, because he is your enemy and you are his 
enemies. If there comes to you from Me an explanation of My path, then whoever amongst you follows the explanation 
of my path, acts accordingly and does not divert from it, he will not go astray from the truth nor will he be misfortunate 
in the afterlife through punishment, but rather Allah will enter him into paradise. 

(jl| And whoever turns away from My reminder and does not accept it or respond to it shall have a constricted and 
miserable life in this world and in the Transitory Stage, and I shall lead him towards the gathering place on the Day of 
Judgment without eyesight and proof. 

HI This person will say: “O Lord, why did you raise me blind today when I could see in the world?” 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The importance of proper etiquette in acquiring knowledge, and that the one listening to knowledge should be calm and 
patient until the one dictating and teaching has completed his task. 

2. Adam forgot and so his children forgot. He did not remain steadfast on firm resolve and they are also the same. He 
quickly repented so Allah forgave him, and whoever resembles his father has not been unjust. 

3. The virtue of repentance, as Adam (peace be upon him) was better after repentance than before. 

4. It is important to beware of the satan, the enemy of humans, who is stationed to constantly stay with him day and night. 

5. Life of misery in this worldly abode, in the Transitory Stage, and in the afterlife for the disbelievers and misguided. 
















( \n ) ^iVj$j 3n3 * ^33 ‘^V-^3^ 

| \ <4^ X^j^ djj ci*->W ij^jlJ^j c3/^ C/* g£^ 

j ^&&\<jtj&zk \j§Ciia\j^4^ 0 £&Vj Li\ 

0 ^5 4o'i}-|^^(. 

(t^j ^“-^3^3? t^3^o^3 <>^3 

_ _ j ^ 9 j s' uwomjjrbu uwiuiv iuwiu: i nv 

^,I .,?l 3 ^ these destroyed nations and 

■£ ^ -£ ^ ^ V' _ ^ ^ %* befell them. T " f t>^ rlf^ctnir*tii 

<^3^3 0^3"^ d)^Wl^3??5 ^ befell these 


24j 


(jp Allah said in refutation of him: “This is like what 
you did in the world, because My signs came to you 
but you turned away from them and left them. Like¬ 
wise, you will be left today in punishment”. 

|f| And this is the kind of reward I give to the one 
engrossed in unlawful desires and who turns away 
from believing in the clear proofs from his Lord. 
And the punishment of Allah in the Hearafter is 
even more horrible, severe, and lasting, than the 
life they will have in the world and in the transition. 
(jf| Is it not clear to the idolaters how many nations I 
destroyed before them? They walk in the homes of 
see the effects of what 
befell them. In the destruction and ruination which 
many nations are lessons for people of 

^ intelligence. 

* @ O Messenger, had a word not preceded from 
your Lord that He will not punish anyone before 
establishing the proof against him, and had there 
^ $ s ^ ^ * ' ^\\ not k een a time which is fixed with Him, the pun- 

ishment would have come to them quickly, due to 
r? a ^ x. their deserving it. 

HI So be patient, O Messenger, on the false things 
those who disbelieve in you say about you. Glorify 
and praise your Lord in the Fajr prayer before sun¬ 
rise; in the Asr prayer before sunset; in the hours of 
night in the Maghrib and Isha prayers; and in the 
Zuhr prayer just after the zenith, which is the end 
of the first part of the day and the beginning of the 
second part; in the hope of attaining reward with 
Allah which you will be pleased with. 

@ And do not desire the types of enjoyment I have 
given to different groups of the disbelievers, the 
glitter of the worldly life which they enjoy so that I may test them. What I have given them of this will disappear, and the 
reward of your Lord which He has promised you and which will make you pleased is better and more lasting. 

(jf| And order your family, O Messenger, to perform prayer, and you also remain constant in its performance. I do not 
ask you for your own sustenance or that of others; I will take care of your sustenance. The praiseworthy outcome in this 
world and the afterlife is for the pious who fear Allah, carrying out His commands and refraining from His prohibitions. 
HI These disbelievers who reject the Prophet (peace be upon him) said: “Why does Muhammad not bring us a sign from 
his Lord which proves his truthfulness and that he is a Messenger?” Has the Qur’an which confirms the previous divine 
books not come to these rejecters? 

K§| And if I were to destroy these deniers of the Prophet (peace be upon him) by sending punishment on them due to their 
disbelief and obstinacy, before sending a messenger to them and revealing a book to them, they would say on the Day of 
Judgment, as an excuse for their disbelief: “O Lord, if only You had sent a messenger to us in the world, so that we could 
have believed in him and followed the verses that he brought, before disgrace and shame befell us through Your punish¬ 
ment”. ||| O Messenger, say to these deniers: “Each one of us and you awaits what Allah will carry out, so wait. You will 
most certainly come to know who are the people of the straight path and who are the guided: us or you?” 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. There will be no excuse for a disbeliever on the day of judgment after the signs and proofs of the Oneness of Allah and 
His orders and prohibitions had come to him in the worldly life. 2. The disbelievers will come to know that divine help 
is for the one who is guided to the true religion. 3. Divine signs benefit the believers, and through them their faith and 
conviction increase. As for those who turn away from them and oppose them, they do not believe in them nor benefit from 
them. 4. Amongst the means which help one bear the harm of those who oppose the message is to spend virtuous times 
in glorification and praise of Allah. 5. It is necessary for the servant, when he notices in himself a yearning for worldly 
adornment, to compare its temporary and deficient pleasure to the perfect and everlasting pleasure of the Hearafter. 

6. It is necessary for the servant to establish prayer properly. When any matter befalls him, he should perform prayer and 
order his family to do so, and be patient in offering them, thereby emulating the Messenger (peace be upon him). 

7. The beautiful praiseworthy outcome, paradise, is for the people of piety. 




(trr) (3/3^Ajjjo 

£^09 SljJ 3jj1^ 33 (j* 





















^.je^sdrY Yi 


\ |j 




0 

lyu£~-Z ^Si J^-j^tr p Cr%j^5 cA>-4^5^ 

^ J 1 (Jy_£>cJ\ \$j— J ^ J )j j^8-jjt\S <11^1 0) 1'jj>l-»la 

5?jS T l3 ^^4 

U3J? 0 j^\L~3]y>j 

' j>% i ? - 


, 

KvJJr'l 


The Prophets (Surah Al-Anbiya) 

® Themes of the Surah: 

It focuses on the uniformity of messengership by 
reminding of the conditions of the messengers and 
their uniform call to worship Allah alone. 

^Explanation: 

Cp People’s being taken to account for their actions 
on the Day of Judgment has come close, but they 
are turning away from the afterlife in their unmind¬ 
fulness, due to their being preoccupied with the 
world. 

Up And no part of the Qur’an which is newly re¬ 
vealed comes to them except that they listen to it 
without benefiting, but rather playful listening, 
without caring about its contents. 

(0) They listened to it whilst their hearts were 
unmindful of it. And those who are wrongdoers 
through disbelief hid their private talk when they 
said: “Is this one who claims to be a messenger but 
a man like you, without any distinction from you? 
What he has brought is magic. So will you follow 
him knowing that he is a man like you and what he 
has brought is magic?” 

jj} The Messenger (peace be upon him) said: “My 
Lord knows the speech you concealed, for He 
knows everything said by anyone in the heavens 
and the earth. He is Hearing of the sayings of His 
servants and Knowing of their actions, for which 
He shall reward them”. 

(Jj) But they were unsure of what Muhammad 
(peace be upon him) brought. At times they said: 


“Confused dreams which have no meaning”. And 
at times they said: “No, but in fact he made it up without any basis”. And sometimes they said: “He is a magician. If he 
is true in his claim, he should bring us a miracle like the former messengers, as they brought miracles like the staff of 
Moses and the camel of Salih”. 

Up Before these who are making a request, no town which ever made a request for divine signs, to be revealed and was 
then granted them as per their request ever believed. In fact, they denied them so I destroyed them. So will these people 
believe? 

@ And I did not send before you, O Messenger, except men amongst humans to whom I would send revelation. I did not 
send them as angels, so ask the People of the Book before you if you do not know this. 

(Sjj) And I did not make the messengers I used to send as bodies which did not eat food. In fact, they used to eat as others 
eat, and they were not to remain in the world without dying. 

CP Then I fulfilled what I promised My messengers, as I saved them and whomever I wanted amongst the believers from 
being destroyed. And I destroyed those who overstepped the limit through disbelief in Allah and committing disobedi¬ 
ence. 

@ I have revealed to you the Qur’an in which lies your honour and pride, if you believe it and act according to its con¬ 
tents. Do you not understand this, so that you hasten towards believing it and practicing what it contains? 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The Day of Judgment is near, making it necessary to prepare for it. 

2. The Qur’an is revealed anew according to incidents and occurrences. 

3. The preoccupation of the hearts in futile things diverts them from the truth. 

4. Falsehood is unable to counter the truth through proof. 

5. Allah’s knowledge encompasses every saying and action of His servants. 

6. The idolaters’ differing in their stance towards the Prophet (peace be upon him) shows their disarray and confusion. 

7. Proof and miracles are of no benefit to stubborn opponents. 

8. Allah is with His messengers and those who believe, by aiding and helping them against the enemies. 

9. The Qur’an is an honour for one who believes in it and practices it. 


0^4^(\^=44j j2$\ 
































@ There are many towns which I destroyed due to 
their injustice through disbelief, and I created other 
people after them. 

@ Then when those who were destroyed saw My 
destructive punishment, they began to run from 
their towns to flee destruction. 

@ They were being called mockingly: “Do not 
flee, but return to your enjoyment of luxuries which 
you were in and to your homes, so that you can be 
questioned somewhat regarding your worldly pos¬ 
sessions”. 

@ These wrongdoers who confessed to their sins 
said: “Woe and destruction for us. We were wrong¬ 
doers due to our disbelief in Allah”. 

@ So they continued confessing to their sins and 
praying for their own destruction until I made them 
like harvested crops, dead without any movement. 
@ And I did not create the heavens and the earth 
and whatever is in between as a plaything or in 
vain, but rather I created them to show My power. 
@ If I wanted to take a wife or child, I would have 
done so on My own part. But I did not do this as I 
am pure of this. 

@ But rather, I throw the truth I reveal to My mes¬ 
sengers upon the falsehood of the disbelievers, and 
it destroys it, and then their falsehood goes and fin¬ 
ishes. And for you, O you who say Allah has taken 
a wife or son, is destruction, due to your describing 
Him with what is inappropriate for Him. 

As taking a wife or child would indicate neediness, 
Allah clearly stated He is the Owner of the Uni¬ 
verse, saying: 

@ And for Him alone is the kingdom of the heav¬ 
ens and the kingdom of earth. And the angels with Him neither scorn worshipping Him nor do they tire of it. 

Cj) They constantly glorify Him without tiring of it. 

But the idolaters took Allahs besides Allah which cannot revive the dead, so how do they worship something unable 
to do this? 

{§§) If there were numerous Allahs in the heavens and the earth, they would have been ruined, due to the Allahs disputing 
in the kingdom. But the reality is not like this. So Allah, Lord of the Throne, is pure of the lie the idolaters describe Him 
with, namely that He has partners. 

p And Allah is alone in His kingdom and decree. Nobody can ask Him what He has decreed and ordered, whilst He will 
ask His servants about their actions and will reward them accordingly. 

{j} But they took other Allahs besides Allah. Say, O Messenger, to these idolaters: “Bring your proof for their being wor¬ 
thy of worship. This book which has been revealed to me and the books revealed upon the messengers contain no proof 
for you”. But rather most of the idolaters only take support from ignorance and blind following, so they turn away from 
accepting the truth. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Oppression is a cause of destruction for individuals and communities. 

2. Allah has not created anything in vain, because He is exalted from doing anything vain. 

3. The victory of truth and the defeat of falsehood are a divine custom. 

4. The angels have been inherently designed and created to obey Allah. 

5. The belief of idolatry has been broken through the proof of mutual negation. 


XIajP \jb\ j A I 

diLj cJ \3\S {^) j 

y ^ ^ ^ 0 ^ y rO “"f. _ y y ^ | 

Q J ^ 






Al-Anbiya 


323 



















ru 








I jfij <JjiJ Vj j IliyL— 5 ^ (^ ^S^j3===^ Slgjp-Jj 

5g^J ^£S2$J 

j j£J^\ <>- ik^Cjt 

».4XsJ (2)\ C$2l$j 

I ^£ 1 




@ And I have not sent before you, O Messenger, 
any messenger except that I revealed to him that 
there is no true Allah except Me, so worship Me 
alone and do not associate any partner with Me. 
@ The idolaters said: “Allah has taken the angels 
as daughters”. Pure and exalted is Allah from the 
lie they say. The angels are in fact the servants of 
Allah, honoured by Him and close to Him. 

{§} They do not proceed before their Lord in any 
saying, so they do not speak until He orders them, 
and they act according to His command and do not 
oppose any command of His. 

@ He knows their previous and latter actions. They 
do not ask to intercede except with His permission 
and on behalf of whom He approves intercession. 
And they are wary out of their fear of Him, so they 
do not oppose Him in any command or prohibition. 
@ And for argument’s sake, whoever amongst the 
angels were to say: “I am a Allah besides Allah”, I 
will punish him for what he says with Hellfire on 
the Day of Judgment, staying therein forever. And 
with this kind of punishment I punish those who 
are unjust by disbelieving and associating partners 
with Allah. 

Do those who disbelieved in Allah not know 
that the heavens and the earth were joint without 
any gap in between that rain should come down 
from it, then I split them apart? And I made every 
animal and plant from the water that comes down 
from the sky. Do they not consider this and believe 
in Allah alone? 

@ And I made firm mountains on earth, so that 
it does not shake those on its surface. I made in it 


Al-Anbiya 

wide paths and ways, so that they may find their way in their journeys towards their objectives. 

@ And I made the sky a roof protected from falling and without any pillar, and protected from stealing words. But the 
idolaters turn away and do not consider the signs in the sky, such as the sun and moon. 

@ Allah alone is the One Who created the night for relaxation, created the day for earning one’s livelihood, created the 
sun as a sign of day, and the moon as a sign of night. The sun and moon both run in their specific orbits, without moving 
away or side-tracking. 

@ O Messenger, I have not given eternity in this life to any human before you. So if your life comes to an end in this life 
and you pass away, will they live forever after you? Never. 

{§5 Every believing and disbelieving soul will taste death in the world. And I test you, O mankind, in the worldly life 
through duties, blessings and hardships, then after your death you shall be returned to Me alone and nobody else, then I 
shall reward you for your deeds. 

Beneficial Points: 

1. All the prophets are united on calling towards monotheism and rejecting idolatry. 

2. Allah is pure of having a child. 

3. The status of the angels with Allah is that they are His servants He has created for His obedience. They are not de¬ 
scribed as either male or female, but rather they are honoured servants. 

4. Intercession will only occur through Allah’s permission and His being pleased with the one being interceded for. 

5. The heavens and the earth were created in gradual steps. 

6. Death is the route of every living being. Neither the pious nor impious are immune from it. 

7. Tests can be through good, just as they are through bad. 


0 o 


































\j>&\3 ^»_4^1|j3w' il^^oLVA/i 


^A> 


I J&yj&££}\k 


si^iijLjy 





@ O Messenger! When these idolaters see you 
they only mock you, trying to make you loathsome 
in the eyes of their followers by saying, “Is this 
the one who insults the idols that you worship?” 
whilst they themselves reject the Qur’an that Allah 
revealed to them and the blessings He conferred 
upon them, together with mocking you. So they 
themselves are closer to shame, due to their accu¬ 
mulating every evil. 

@ The human was created intrinsically to be hasty, 
and so he/she wants things to happen before their 
due time. The idolaters asking for the punishment 
is a result of that nature. O the ones seeking My 
punishment in haste! I shall show you exactly what 
you hastily seek, so there is no need to ask for it. 
@ And the disbelievers who reject resurrection say 
in their haste, “O Muslims! If indeed you are truth¬ 
ful in what you claim, when will this resurrection 
that you promise us with, happen?” 

@ If these disbelieving rejecters of the resurrec¬ 
tion were to know of the time when they will not be 
able to turn the hellfire away from their faces and 
backs, they would not be so hasty in seeking it. If 
only they were to know that there shall be no one 
to help relieve them of the punishment, and if only 
they were convinced of its reality, they would not 
be so hasty either. 

This fire that they shall be punished with will 
come upon them suddenly, without them anticipat¬ 
ing it. They shall not be able to repel it, nor shall 
they be given respite to repent and consequently be 
shown mercy. 

When the Messenger of Allah peace be upon him 
suffered from the mockery of his people and their rejection of him, Allah consoled him by saying: 

@ O Messenger! Even if your people mock you, you are not unique in that, because many messengers before you were 
also mocked at. After their messengers warned them of it, the very punishment the disbelievers made a mockery of en¬ 
gulfed them in this very world. 

@ O Messenger! Say to these people who are hastily seeking the punishment: “Who will save you throughout the night 
and day from the punishment and destruction The Merciful intends to send upon you?” Rather, they are desisting from 
the admonition and proofs of their Lord; they foolishly and ignorantly do not ponder over any of it. 

(@) Do they have Allahs that will protect them from My punishment? They are not capable of helping even themselves 
by removing any harm or acquiring any benefit! Whoever cannot help himself, how can he help others? Nor will they be 
protected from My punishment. 

@ Rather, I have supplied these disbelievers and their forefathers with all My blessings I conferred upon them, so that as 
time passes, they become blinded by them and stand firm upon their disbelief, gradually leading themselves into destruc¬ 
tion. Do these people, deluded by My blessings and hastily seeking My punishment, not realise that I am narrowing the 
earth down from all sides, by My influence over the people and power over them? Do they not take lesson from that, lest 
the same does not happen to them? These people will not be victorious; they shall be beaten. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The declaration of disbelief for the one who mocks the Messenger, regardless of whether it is through speech, action, 
or gesture. 

2. Being hasty is in the nature of a human, whilst calmness is a virtuous trait. 

3. Mocking the truth and the people of the truth is a trait of the disbelievers, past and present. 

4. No one can protect from the punishment of Allah, except Allah. 

5. For the disbelievers, blessings are means of gradually luring them into further destruction. 

6. The final outcome of falsehood is non-existence, whereas the final outcome of the truth is eternity. 


1 0 



















(SjP Say, O Messenger: “O people! I only warn you 
of the punishment of Allah through divine revela¬ 
tion that my Lord reveals to me.” When those deaf 
to the truth are warned of the punishment of Allah, 
they do not listen to it with a heeding ear. 

@ O Messenger! If some of punishment of your 
Lord was to afflict these people who are seeking it 
hastily, they would then say, “Woe to our destruc- 




|rr\| 





ol> 



1 

\ 'sl kj 0 

{jt j* ^ Xskj*(Q CljJyjS 

i\_(0 

j J\£0 Ou4p^ \oZty% \S \S0 

\ Llaj 1 ^ 0 f 3^-\j 

jj| 0 Cr^ l£ L* I 


Vj4r' 



tion and loss! We were wrong in our ascribing part- ^ ^ISit 

ners to Allah and rejecting what Muhammad peace -2§ ~ . .« ' ^ ^ v 

be upon him brought to us!” 

@ I shall establish fair scales for the rising people 
to weigh their deeds with. On that day, no soul shall 
be wronged by having its good deeds decreased, or 
bad deeds increased. Even if the weighed deed is 
minute, like the weight equal to a mustard seed, I «Q 
shall include it. I Myself am sufficient to take the 
deeds of My servants into account. 

{J} I have given Moses and Aaron peace be upon 
them both the Torah, which distinguished between 
the permissible and the impermissible; was a means 
of guidance for those who believed in it, and a re¬ 
minder for those who were mindful of their Lord. 

(Sj) Those who fear the punishment of their Lord 
Who they believe in, despite having not seen Him, 
and are fearful of the Hour. 

(jp This Qur’an which was revealed onto Muham¬ 
mad peace be upon him is a reminder and an ad¬ 
monition for those who want to take heed from it. 

It contains an abundance of benefit and goodness. 

Despite all that, do you still reject it? Do you not 
acknowledge its contents, and will you not practice 
upon it? 

@ And I granted Abraham proof against his people in his childhood, and I knew him well. I gave him the proof he de¬ 
served according to My knowledge. 

(jp When he said to his father Azar and his people, “What are these idols that you have made with your own hands, and 
which you constantly worship?” 

(jp His people said to him: “We found our forefathers worshipping them, so we also worshipped them following their 
example.” 

@) Abraham said to them, “You and your forefathers are in clear deviance from the path of truth!” 

C|P His people said to him, “Are you serious about what you said, or are you joking?” 

Abraham said, “No, I am serious! Your Lord is the Lord of the heavens and the earth; He created them without there 
having been anything like them previously. I am from those who testify that He is your Lord and the Lord of the heavens 
and the earth, and that your idols have no share in that!” 

(jp And in a manner inaudible to his people, Abraham said, “By Allah! Once you have left your idols to go to your festi¬ 
val, I shall hatch a plot concerning them that you shall hate.” 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Heedlessness is a barrier from accepting the truth. 

2. The disbelievers cannot bear the least of the punishment; how will they bear the most severe? 

3. The fruit of acknowledging error is only acquired after repenting from it before the opportunity slips. 

4. The deeds of the servants of Allah will be weighed on the scales on the day of Judgement. 

5. Affirmation of the attribute of justice for Allah, and negation of oppression on His part. 

6. The importance of the strength of evidence in calling towards Allah. 

7. The harm of following blindly. 

8. Calling towards Allah is a serious call, not one to be taken as a joke. 

9. Gradual progression in changing evil; the need to start with the easiest to change first, and then onwards. Abraham 
started off by trying to change the evil of his people through speech and presenting evidences, then moved on to changing 
it by taking action. 

















\y\^\J^s> ^ 'Jc*^Lj iS J 

^ #■ iji V-3 (^) j * j > i Oi^i 

Jo 4^X^d | 

i^5Si$^i#tj^1 ^=S\.y\3^-i3 

c3V 3 (^) 3sJoijLgr^JO^! 

3 $t:^L>«,-, 4 <»i 2 SS 

4J^qA<. 



^i/'r^’ij » ($) S& 



© So Abraham broke the idols into small pieces, 
and left the biggest of them hoping that the people 
return to it to ask it who smashed the others. 

© So when they returned and found their idols 
having been smashed into pieces, they asked one 
another, “Who smashed our idols? Indeed, the one 
who has smashed them is from the oppressors, due 
to him having degraded that which deserves rever¬ 
ence and sanctification.” 

© Those who had heard Abraham take an oath on 
Allah that he would plot against the idols, said, “We 
heard a young man talk evil regarding them and 
finding fault with them. He is known by the name 
‘Abraham’; perhaps it is he who smashed them.” 
@ Their chiefs said, “Bring Abraham in front of 
the people so that they may testify to his confession 
to what he did, and their confession will be your 
evidence against him.” 

© So they brought Abraham (peace be upon him) 
and questioned him, blaming him: “Was it you who 
did this horrible act to our idols, O Abraham?!” 

@ Sarcastically, exposing the helplessness of the 
idols to the people, Abraham said, “I did not do it; 
rather, the biggest idol did it. Ask your idols, if in¬ 
deed they are capable of speaking!” 

© So they turned to one another contemplating and 
considering. It had become clear to them that their 
idols do not benefit nor harm in any way, and so 
they were wrong in worshipping them instead of 
Allah. 

© They then returned to their stubbornness and 
denial, saying, “O Abraham! You know, surely, that 
these idols cannot speak, so how can you then tell 
us to ask them?” They intended it to be an evidence in their favour, but it became an evidence against them. 

© Rebuking them, Abraham said, “Do you then worship, instead of Allah, idols that do not benefit nor harm you; that 
are helpless in removing harm or bringing benefit to even themselves?” 

© Shame on you, and shame upon that which you worship other than Allah, which neither benefit nor harm! Do you not 
understand that? Will you not leave their worship? 

© When they found themselves incapable of countering Abraham with proof, they resorted to force and said, “If you are 
going to give Abraham a deterring punishment and seek revenge for your idols that he broke and destroyed, then bum 
him in a fire.” 

© They lit a fire and threw Abraham into it, so I said, “O fire! Become cool and safe for Abraham!” And so it became 
such, and no harm came to him. 

© Abraham’s (peace be upon him) people planned to burn him and I foiled their plan. Rather, I made them the ones who 
were overpowered and destroyed. 

© I saved Abraham and I also saved Lot. I expatriated them to the land of Syria that I had blessed, by having sent many 
prophets to it and by scattering many forms of goodness for the creation. 

© And I blessed Abraham with Isaac when he invoked his Lord to grant him a child. In addition, I also blessed him with 
Jacob. I made each one of the three: Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, pious and obedient to Myself. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The permissibility of using various strategies in expounding the truth and counteracting falsehood. 

2. The insistence of the people of falsehood on their falsehood is due to their stubbornness, not the strength of their evi¬ 
dence, nor the weakness of the evidence of the people of tmth. 

3. The people of falsehood hold onto evidence they assume to be in their favour, but which are in reality against them. 

4. Being harsh in speech can sometimes be a means of changing evil, if there is no greater harm that arises due to it. 

5. Resorting to using force is proof of incapability to counteract using evidence. 

6. Allah’s help for His believing servants and His saving them from difficulties comes from ways that are unanticipated. 


Al-Anbiya 327 Part 17 
















| ! p Jy* 


rYA 




LlSi 'ky^~ === ^} \ cyJQ-\ 

J *V>cilvg3 \ (^AllA^O^ (^) (^Lfl. i *** $ j 

<^j^=====a\ O^-J aV-^15 


O^X-\ ^oL^^==== : u^: {^) 

{^) j*. J^£*z>^\^y ^y^ 

\jy>c^\^S^ L^x»gA3 

. r „ -, „ 

£ 



@ I made them into leaders whom the people 
followed in goodness.With His permission, they 
would call to the worship of Allah alone. I also re¬ 
vealed to them that they should do good deeds, per¬ 
form prayer with perfection and give Zakat. They 
were obedient to Me. 

@ And to Lot I granted the ability to judge fair¬ 
ly between disputing parties, together with sound 
knowledge of his religion. I also saved him from 
the punishment I sent upon the people of his village 
(Sodom) who were involved in immorality. Indeed, 
they were corrupt people who deviated from the 
worship of their Lord. 

{§} And I entered him into My Mercy when I saved 
him from the punishment that befell his people. In¬ 
deed, he was of those who obeyed My commands 
and stayed away from My prohibitions. 

@ O Messenger! Mention the story of Noah when 
he called to Allah before Abraham and Lot, and so 
He accepted his call by granting him what he asked 
for: Allah saved him and his believing family mem¬ 
bers from the great sorrow. 

@ I saved him from the evil plot of those of his 
people who rejected the signs that I supported him 
with; those signs that pointed to his truthfulness. 

Indeed, they were evil, corrupt people, and so I de¬ 
stroyed them all by drowning them. 

@ O Messenger! And mention the story of David 
and his son Solomon (peace be upon them), when 
they were passing judgement in the case brought 
to them regarding the two disputers: One of them 
had a herd that went into the fields of the other at 
night. I was witness to the judgement of David and Al-Anbiya 

Solomon; no part of their judgement evaded My knowledge. 

@ I gave full understanding of the case to Solomon instead of his father David; yet I blessed each one with messenger- 
ship and knowledge of religious law, not exclusively Solomon only. I subjugated the mountains for David, which would 
glorify Me with his glorifying Me. I also subjugated the birds for him. I was the One Who gave the understanding, the 
fair judgement, knowledge and it was I who subjugated the mountains and birds. 

(jp) I exclusively taught David, and not Solomon, the skill of crafting armour, so that you could protect yourselves from 
anyone who tried to attack you with weapons. O people! Will you then show gratitude for this blessing that I bestowed 
upon you? 

@) And I subjugated the strong-blowing wind for Solomon. At his command, whenever he would command it to, it would 
blow to the land of Syria which I had blessed by sending prophets to, and the goodness I spread within it. I am the One 
Who did everything; nothing evades My knowledge. 

Beneficial Points: 

1. Doing good deeds, prayer and Zakat are from those things the Heavenly Religions agreed upon. 

2. Saving the people of the truth and destroying the people of falsehood is a divine code. 

3. Indulgence in immorality is the means to being afflicted in an annihilating punishment. 

4. Uprightness is a means of entering into the Mercy of Allah. 

5. Divine help is in favour of the people of the truth over the people of falsehood. 

6. Prayer is a means of salvation from troubles. 


I 

j^ ====: ^ c&y^ 


2W W^3 \ jj (£) 

~ ' ^ <■ < . 
I'Ji 





















Oj-' 


k*£-' 


6 


Oj j^l ^ C/ 3 /jr\ \ Cj%3 

*0 1X^=3 

0 < 4 $ j 15 j 

j 4JJ&\ AlXu\ ^AjLs \jJLfX-3 



I 4jXj-k. Jjj X \ij 

,U ol^iSjfJ J^dJ4^C3 

i£3ij4££2-i6 0^s^Bf^>io^i= 

j \ij^====sjj (^) ^ ciJV-x^==j \ cj^- ^ 

fejL> <Ji)Jj>*$ ^J*X) l£ *\J> il 


@1 I subjugated those Shayatln who would dive 
into the oceans for him and find pearls etc. among 
doing other things like construction. I supervised 
their numbers and work well; nothing escaped My 
observation. 

{§p O Messenger! Mention the story of Job, when he 
prayed to his Lord at the time of affliction, saying, 
“O my Lord! I have been afflicted with an illness 
and loss of family, yet you are the most merciful 
from all those who show mercy, so remove the af¬ 
flictions that have befallen me.” 

@ And so I accepted his prayer and removed the 
harm that had befallen him; I granted him not just 
the family he had lost, but also more along with 
them. I did all that out of My Mercy, and so that it 
serves as a reminder for each subservient worship¬ 
per of Allah, in order that he may bear patience just 
as Job bore patience. 

(jj} O Messenger! Also mention Ishmael, Enoch and 
Ezekiel, (peace be upon them). Each one of them 
were from the patient ones at times of suffering and 
on whatever responsibility Allah placed on them. 
(JP I enveloped them into My Mercy: I made them 
prophets and granted them entry into paradise. In¬ 
deed, they were from those pious servants of Mine 
who acted within My obedience, and whose private 
and public lives were ones of piety. 

^ j'r (jp O Messenger! Also mention the story of the 
jpAJ ^ Companion of the Whale: Jonah (peace be upon 
him), when he went away without the permission 
of his Lord, angry with his people for their insist¬ 
ence on sin. He thought I would not constrain him 
by punishing him for his hurrying away; and so he 
was afflicted with a severe form of constraint and imprisonment when the Whale swallowed him. He then called out in 
the darknesses of the belly of the Whale, the ocean and the night, acknowledging his error and repenting to Allah for it, 
saying, “There is no true deity except You, You are glorified of all faults and sanctified. Indeed, I was one of the wrong¬ 
doers.” 

@ So I accepted his call and saved him from that severe distress by taking him out from all the darknesses including 
from the belly of the Whale. Just like I saved Jonah from this distress of his, I also save the believers when they fall into 
distress and call out to Me for help. 

(@) O Messenger! Also mention the story of Zechariah (peace be upon him), when he prayed to his Lord saying, “O my 
Lord! Do not leave me alone without any children. You are the best of the living, so grant me a child that lives after me.” 
IjjS) I accepted his prayer for him, and granted him a child in John. In the process, I also cured his wife, who had been 
barren up until that point. Indeed, Zechariah, his wife and son were quick in doing good deeds, and would call out to Me 
eager in My reward and fearful of My punishment. They would frequently supplicate to Me. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Patience is a quality of the prophets (peace be upon them). 

2. Piety is a means of Mercy. 

3. Acknowledging one’s sin is one of the etiquettes of supplication. 

4. Turning to Allah is a way of relieving one’s troubles. 

5. There is virtue in seeking children who live on after you die. 

6. Continue to be mindful of Allah in prosperity, Allah will acknowledge you at times of difficulty. 






















IZLb JO-&N 


4 <§) | 

^ ^ ^ 9 * *<h 

)\J>M a-kj>-'$ a jf 



(Sfp O Messenger! Also mention the story of Mary 
peace be upon her, who protected herself from for¬ 
nication. Allah then sent Gabriel (peace be upon 
him) to her, and he blew into her. Consequently, she 
became pregnant with Jesus (peace be upon him); 
they were both signs for the people of the Power of 
Allah, and proofs that nothing is beyond Allah’s ca¬ 
pability such that He created Jesus without a father. 

(S§jj) O people! This is your creed; one and only 
creed. It is monotheism which is the religion of Is¬ 
lam. I am your Lord, so make worship exclusive to 
Me alone. 

@ The people differed: some were monotheists, 
idolaters, disbelievers and believers. All these dif¬ 
ferent types of people will return to Me alone on the 
Day of Judgment, when I shall requit them accord¬ 
ing to their deeds. 

(j§5 So whosoever from among them did good 
deeds, whilst he believed in Allah, His messengers 
and in the last day, will not be denied the due of his 
good deeds. Rather, Allah will multiply his reward 
for him and he will find it recorded in his book of 
deeds on the day he is resurrected for which he will 
be pleased. 

It is impossible for the people of a village I de¬ 
stroyed due to their disbelief that they return to the 
world to repent, and that I accept their repentance. 

They will never return, even until the barrier of 
Gog and Magog is opened and they begin emerg¬ 
ing, hurriedly descending from every high piece of 
land. 

@ Their emergence, terror and violence will be a 
sign of the rising drawing nearer. The disbelievers 
will be left wide-eyed in horror, saying: Oh my, what a destruction faces us! We were indulged in futility in the world, 
preoccupied from preparing for this severe day. Rather, we were wrongdoers by disbelieving and committing sins. 

@) O idolaters! You and whatever you worship instead of Allah, together with whoever is content with you worshipping 
them, shall be the fuel of hellfire. You and everything you worship will surely enter it. 

djjj) If these worshipped things were in reality Allahs that were worthy of being worshipped, they would not be entering 
the hellfire with their worshippers. Yet they shall all be entering it, having to remain in it forever, never to come out of it. 
||| Due to the severity of torture they shall face, they shall wail and breathe sharply. They will not be able to hear sounds 
due to the immense horrific torment that will afflict them. 

(||| When the idolaters said, “Indeed, Jesus and the angels whom were worshipped, will therefore enter the hellfire!” Allah 
said, “Verily, those regarding whom it was decreed in the Knowledge of Allah that they would be from the people of good 
fortune, like Jesus (peace be upon him), will be kept away from the hellfire.” 

4*} Beneficial Points: 

1. Reference made to chastity and mention of its virtue. 

2. Unanimity of the divine messages in monotheism and the fundamental acts of worship. 

3. Faith in monotheism is a prerequisite for the acceptance of good deeds. 

4. The opening of the barrier of Gog and Magog is one of the major signs preceding the Hour. 

5. Negligence in preparing for the Day of Judgment leads to having to suffer from its horrors. 


iJJ ,0 ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ >9^ ^ *0 ^ *>*0 

_ j ^==2 





















Lj\ Jo c5>^^3i 

>I^UjJ£J \-Xl&._|6^£) \ ^Jj> A^p 

^jV^jlxlj 2la~>~) S J ^<iXl^L-^j\ Laj(j£) ^ j_Xsl£' 

I \^ujT\ J 5 0 

z\*+*^\p'^S*j2\e. ( \j>i V»jj»V^0^''' : ' j^LL^ 

I JU/40 ^j^j\S jL_* C 1 4s^o^<& 
I l£> o&5 0 o/^====uU dj^ LS'l'-W ^ 

^d>4<^jJ^0Q^i^£^^JL^===i} Ax3j^_i5 



<0 The sound of Hell shall not reach their ears, 
while they shall reside among whatever bounties 
their hearts desire. These bounties shall never fin¬ 
ish. 

(jf| The great horror of the hellfire when it sur¬ 
rounds its inhabitants shall not scare them, and the 
angels will welcome them with glad tidings, say¬ 
ing: “This is your day that you were promised in 
the world; the one you were given glad tidings of 
receiving bounties in!” 

|f| On the day in which I shall roll up the heavens 
like the rolling up of a scroll, and congregate the 
creation in the state they were created in the first in¬ 
stance. I have promised that it will happen; a prom¬ 
ise that there is no going back on. I shall indeed 
fulfil My promise. 

(jfl I had indeed written in the books I revealed 
unto the messengers, after I had written it in the 
Preserved Tablet, that the earth would be ruled by 
the pious, obedient servants of Allah: they are the 
nation of Muhammad peace be upon him. 

IH Verily, in the admonition I revealed, there is a 
message for those who worship their Lord accord¬ 
ing to what He has legislated for them. It is they 
who truly benefit from it. 

HJ O Muhammad! I have not sent you as a messen¬ 
ger, except as a merciful one to the whole of crea¬ 
tion. This is because you are distinguished with as¬ 
piring for the guidance of all people and their safety 
from the punishment of Allah. 

HI Say, O Messenger: It is only revealed to me 
from my Lord that your true deity is only One; He 
has no partner, and He is Allah. So submit to believ¬ 


ing in Him, and acting in His obedience. 

HI O Messenger! If these people turn away from that which you have brought to them, then say to them, “I am informing 
you that we are both in agreement that we are different, and I do not know when the punishment Allah promised you 
with, will descend upon you.” 

@ Indeed, Allah knows of the speech you disclose, and He knows of that which you keep secret. Nothing from either 
evades Him, and He will requit you for it. 

HI I do not know whether your respite from being punished is a test for you, or whether it is to lure you further into 
destruction, and to give you freedom until a time decreed in the Knowledge of Allah, so that you persist in your disbelief 
and error. 

|jj) Supplicating to his Lord, the Messenger of Allah peace be upon him said, “O my Lord! Judge well between us and 
those of our people who have persisted on disbelief. We seek help from our Lord alone, against your statements of dis¬ 
belief and rejection.” 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Piety is a means to achieving power on Earth. 

2. The Prophet peace be upon him is a mercy for the worlds. 

3. The Messenger peace be upon him does not know the Ghaib. 

4. Allah is ever aware of what His servants say. 





























<^*-*2^ Ub J-* jo V»JiO 

lP ^ ^ L£/yjLgl>~ J-*-=- Ob (J^= 

r y59 ^ <^\ cj£^===fcAA 

0 CT -*f . "? 

(JjJ^ 

*i±iij jA^^jAjIS i^J> ^j^O\ 4^k>C_^^==3 

> 






The Pilgrimage (Surah Al-Hajj) 

^ Themes of the Surah: 

It focuses on the issue of reverence and submission 
to Allah, through presenting the manifestations of 
divine greatness and power. This is why it starts by 
warning and it includes two prostrations- which are 
preformed to Allah, when recited. 

® Explanation: 

CjJ O people, be mindful of your Lord by carrying 
out what He has ordered you and desisting from 
what He has forbidden you. The earthquake and 
other horrors that will accompany the Day of Judg¬ 
ment are a grave matter, for which it is necessary to 
prepare through actions which please Allah. 

|J) On the day you see it, every nursing mother 
shall be absentminded of her nursing child and 
every pregnant being will abort her pregnancy, due 
to intense fear. You shall see people, because of los¬ 
ing their senses, like drunkards, due to the severe 
horror of the standing. They will not be drunk out 
of drinking alcohol, but rather the punishment of 
Allah is severe, thus it has made them loses their 
senses. 

After Allah mentioned the horrors which will ac¬ 
company the occurrence of the Hour, He refuted 
those who deny the Day of Judgment and the resur¬ 
rection. He said: 

CfJ) Amongst people there is he who argues regard¬ 
ing Allah’s power to resurrect the dead, without any 
knowledge to take support from, and who in his be¬ 
lief and saying follows every satan and misguided 
leader who is rebellious against his Lord. 

C|It is decreed regarding such rebellious humans and jinns that whoever follows him and accepts him, he will lead them 
astray from the path of truth, and he will drag him towards the fire of Hell through the disbelief and sins which lead 
towards it. 

(jj O people, if you have any doubt regarding My power to resurrect you after your death, think about your creation: I 
created your father Adam from soil; then I created his children from sperm which the man casts into the woman’s womb; 
then the sperm turns into solid blood; then the solid blood turns into a piece of meat; then the piece of meat turns into 
either a sound creation which remains in the womb until it comes out alive as a child or into an unsound form which the 
womb aborts, to show My power by creating you in stages. And I settle in the wombs whatever fetus I wish until it is 
bom in a fixed time period of nine months. Then I take you out of your mothers’ wombs as children, so that you reach the 
pinnacle of strength and intelligence. Amongst you are some who die before this and amongst you are those who reach 
old age where strength and intelligence weaken, to the extent that he becomes worse than a child, no longer knowing 
anything he used to know. And you will see the earth dry without any plants on it. Then when I send down rainwater on 
it, it opens up with plants, rises due to the plants growing, and brings forth every type of beautiful plant. 

Beneficial Points: 

1. It is necessary to prepare for the Day of Judgment through the provision of piety. 

2. Compassion has been established for mothers, especially during breastfeeding. 

3. The horrors of the Day of Judgment are severe. 

4. Those who deny resurrection have no proof they rely on. 

5. To create gradually is the custom of Allah. 

6. The initial creation is a proof for the possibility of resurrection. 

7. The phenomenon of rain and the subsequent growing of plants on earth is a physical proof of the resurrection of the 
dead. 


JL5 2^1 iVji* \ j 

tap* \ aJS 

-^ - ~ " 
























c|(J?o]5 I 

4ill t'^^y^^ji Aidant 4lS ( ^ ) ^y_Q 


OLI 


jt^g g^ @) That which I have mentioned to you, namely 
the beginning of your creation, its stages and the 
conditions of those bom amongst you, is so that you 
believe that Allah Who created you is the Truth in 
which there is no doubt, as opposed to the idols you 
worship, and so that you believe He will restore the 
dead, and that He has power over everything. 

CJS) And so that you believe the Hour is to come, 
without any doubt in its coming, and that Allah will 
resurrect the dead from their graves to reward them 
for their actions. 

After Allah mentioned misguidance due to blind 
following in the third verse, He mentioned the mis¬ 
guidance of the leaders of disbelief, saying: 
dJ) Among the disbelievers is he who argues re¬ 
garding the oneness of Allah and regarding His 
sending His Messenger with guidance, without any 
proof from sound reasoning or clear sound texts, 
but solely due to his desires. 

@ Turning his neck in arrogance, to turn people 
away from faith and entering the religion of Allah. 
He who fits this description shall have disgrace in 
this world due to the punishment which will befall 
him, and I shall make him taste the punishment of 
the burning fire in the Hearafter. 

@ It will be said to him: “That punishment which 
you tasted is due to the disbelief and sins you com¬ 
mitted. Allah does not punish any of His creation 
except due to a sin”. 

@ Amongst people is a confused person who wor¬ 
ships Allah in doubt. If good such as health and 
wealth come to him, he remains on his faith and 
worship of Allah, but if he is afflicted by an afflic¬ 
tion through illness or poverty, he takes bad omen from his religion and then renounces it. He has lost his world, because 
his disbelief will never increase him in a share of the world which was not written for him, and he has lost his afterlife 
due to the punishment of Allah which will meet him. That is the clear loss. 

@ He worships besides Allah idols which cannot harm him if he disobeys them, nor can they benefit him if he obeys 
them. That calling upon idols which can neither harm nor benefit is the misguidance far from the truth. 

@ This disbeliever who worships idols calls upon the one whose confirmed harm is closer than his absent benefit. Bad 
is the deity whose harm is closer than his benefit. Bad is it as a helper to one who seeks its help, and as a companion to 
who accompanies it. 

{Jp Allah will enter those who have faith in Hi m and do good actions into gardens beneath whose palaces rivers flow. 
Allah does what He pleases, by having mercy on whom He wants to show mercy and punishing whom He wants to pun¬ 
ish. Nothing can compel Him. 

@ Whoever thinks Allah will not help His Prophet (peace be upon him) in this world and the afterlife should extend a 
rope to the ceiling of his house and then hang himself by cutting himself off the ground. Then he should see if that re¬ 
moves the anger he feels in his heart. Allah is the Helper of His Prophet, whether his opponents like it or not. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Pride is a characteristic which stops a person from being guided to the truth. 

2. It is from the justice of Allah that He only punishes due to sins. 

3. Faith and good actions are a means of entering paradise. 

4. Allah helps His Prophet and His religion, even if the disbelievers dislike it. 


^ Tf ^ - si » * \^l x f 

\ AJb jo 1 

Ojj 

< .*90 3 o a ^*9 $ ^ 4 ** 


Al-Hajij 


1^4 

















@ Just as I explained the clear proofs for resurrec¬ 
tion, I revealed the Qur’an to Muhammad (peace 
be upon him) as clear verses, and Allah enables 
whomever He wishes through His grace to the path 
of guidance and righteousness. 

@ Those who have faith in Allah, and they are: 
the believers from this nation, the Jews, the Sabi- 
ans (a group of followers of one of the prophets), 
the Christians, the Magians (fire-worshippers), the 
idolaters; Allah will judge between them on the 
Day of Judgment, then He will enter the believers 
amongst them into paradise and enter others into 
hellfire. Allah is a Witness to all the sayings and 
actions of His servants, with nothing being hidden 
from Him, and He shall reward them for these ac¬ 
tions. 

@ O Messenger, do you not know that to Allah 
prostrate, out of obedience, the angels in the heav¬ 
ens and the believing humans and jinns on earth, 
and the sun, moon, stars in the sky, the mountains, 
trees, and creatures on earth, compliantly? And 
many humans prostrate to Him out of obedience. 

But many refuse to prostrate to Him out of obe¬ 
dience, thus the punishment of Allah became es¬ 
tablished for them due to their disbelief. Whoever 
Allah decrees disgrace and shame for, due to his 
disbelief, has nobody to honour him. Allah does 
what He wishes. There is nobody to compel Him. 

After Allah stated those who prostrate to Him obe¬ 
diently and those who refuse, He followed that with 
mentioning the outcome of each of them, saying: 

These are two parties arguing regarding their 
Lord, as to which of them is right: the party of faith 
and party of disbelief. The party of disbelief will be encompassed by the fire, just as clothes cover the person wearing 
them, and extremely hot water will be poured on top of their heads. 

J The intestines in their stomachs will melt with it, due to its intense heat, and it will reach their skins and melt them, 
j They will have iron hammers in the fire, with which the angels will hit their heads. 

dj) Whenever they will try to leave the fire, due to the severe anxiety they will face in it, they will be returned to it and 
they will be told: “Taste the punishment of the burning fire”. 

@ The party of faith, and they are those who have faith in Allah and do good actions, will be entered by Allah in gardens 
under whose palaces and trees rivers will flow. Allah will adorn them by giving them gold bracelets and He will adorn 
them by giving them pearls, and their clothes therein will be silk. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Guidance is in Allah’s hands; He grants it to whomever He wishes amongst His servants. 

2. Allah watches over all the actions and conditions of His servants. 

3. All the creation of Allah submit to Him by decree, and the believers submit to Him in obedience. 

4. The punishment will befall the people of disbelief and disobedience, and mercy is established for the people of faith 
and obedience. 


61 , 


















^ ci 11? A-ftj 

^d^^^dtsTp o-ilu, 

J^-^} >-_^^ Ap(^j5. A.—L-) 

J^j^Sl ^ o v^i ^k?($) 

d-i (j 4 




? * J> 


9 a 0 9 -a 


(jp Allah guided them in the worldly life towards 
pleasant sayings, such as testifying there is no Allah 
besides Allah, proclaiming the greatness of Allah 
and praising Him, and He guided them towards the 
praiseworthy path of Islam. 

@ Those who disbelieved in Allah, turn others 
away from entering Islam and stop people from the 
Sacred Mosque, like what the idolaters did in the 
year of Hudaiybiyah, that mosque which I made a 
direction for people in their prayers and one of the 
rites of Hajj and Umrah, and in which the person 
from Makkah who lives there and one who comes 
there besides the people of Makkah are the same; 
whoever intends to purposefully commit a shame¬ 
ful sin therein, I will make him taste a painful pun¬ 
ishment. 

@ Remember, O Messenger, when I clarified for 
Abraham (peace be upon him) the place of the 
house and its limits, after it was unknown, and I 
revealed to him not to associate anything in wor¬ 
shipping Me, but rather worship Me alone. And pu¬ 
rify My House from physical and immaterial impu¬ 
rities for those who circumambulate it and perform 
prayer therein. 

(jjj Proclaim amongst the people, calling them to¬ 
wards pilgrimage of this House I ordered you to 
build. They will come to you walking and riding 
on every camel which is frail due to the difficulty 
it endured from travelling. The camels will bring 
them, carrying them from every distant path. 

@ So that they come to what will bring them ben¬ 
efit such as forgiveness of sins, attaining reward, 
unity of word, and so forth; and so that they remem¬ 
ber Allah on the animals they slaughter in the known days, which are: the tenth of DhuT-Hijjah and three days after it, 
in gratitude to Allah for the camels, cows and sheep He granted them. So eat of these animals and feed from them those 
who are extremely poor. 

Then they should complete what remains of their Hajj rites, coming out of ihraam by shaving their heads, clipping 
their nails, and removing the dirt which has accumulated on them due to ihraam, and fulfil the Hajj, Umrah or sacrificial 
animal they made binding on themselves. They should perform the Tawaaf Ifadah of the House which Allah freed from 
the control of tyrants. 

@ That which you have been ordered, i.e., coming out of ihraam by shaving the head, clipping the nails, removing dirt, 
fulfilling the vow and circumambulating the House, is what Allah has made obligatory on you. So respect what Allah 
has made obligatory on you. Whoever refrains from what Allah has ordered him to refrain from during his ihraam, out of 
respect for not trespassing the limits of Allah and making lawful its prohibitions, it is better for him in this world and the 
afterlife in the sight of his Lord. O people, camels, cows and sheep amongst livestock have been made lawful for you. 
He did not make unlawful for you hami, bahirah or wasilah. He only made unlawful for you what you find in the Qur’an, 
such as carrion, blood and so forth. Stay far from the impurity of idols and stay far from lying and false evidence. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Paradise is free from actions and statements that would spoil it. 

2. The sanctity of the Sacred House demands being cautious of sins therein more than other places. 

3. It is necessary to purify the houses of Allah from symbolic and physical impurities. 

4. The House of Allah is the refuge of the believers’ hearts in every era and place. 

5. The benefits of Hajj, be they worldly or of the Hearafter, return to the people. 

6. Being grateful for blessings necessitates compassion on the weak. 

7. It is necessary to purify the hearts of corrupt beliefs and to purify the tongues of lying. 















@ Refrain from this, turning away from every reli¬ 
gion besides the religion He is pleased with, with¬ 
out associating any partner with Him in worship. 

Whoever associates a partner with Allah, it is as 
though He has fallen from the sky, then either the 
birds snatch his meat and bones or the wind flings 
him to a distant place. 

(Sj) That is what Allah ordered, namely His oneness, 
being sincere to Him, and refraining from idols and 
false speech. Whoever respects the signs of the reli¬ 
gion, amongst them sacrificial animals and the rites 
of Hajj, respecting them is part of the hearts being 
mindful of their Lord. 

For you in the sacrificial animals that you 
slaughter at the House are benefits, such as rid¬ 
ing, wool, procreation, milk, until a limited time to 
the time of their slaughter near the House of Allah 
which He freed from the control of tyrants. 

For every previous nation I made rites to shed 
blood, as a means of closeness to Allah, in the hope 
they will remember Allah at the time of slaughter¬ 
ing these sacrificial animals, and in gratitude to 
Allah for the camels, cows and sheep He granted 
them. Your true Allah, O people, is One Allah who 
has no partner, so submit to Him alone through 
submission and obedience. And O Messenger, tell 
those who are humbly submissive and sincere what 
will please them. 

@ Those who when they remember Allah, fear His 
punishment and thus move far away from opposing 
His command, perform their prayer completely, be 
patient if any affliction befalls them, and spend in 
the different avenues of righteousness from what 
Allah has granted them. 

And I have made the camels which are taken to the House amongst the sacred signs and symbols of the religion. In 
them are worldly and religious benefits for you, so say “in the name of Allah” when slaughtering them, after their feet 
have been lined up whilst standing and one of their feet has been tied so that they do not flee. Then when they fall on 
their sides after being slaughtered, eat of them, O those who are sacrificing, and give of them to the pauper who desists 
from begging and the pauper who comes forward to be granted a share of them. Just as I made them submissive to you 
so that you carry loads on them and ride them, I have also made them submissive to you so they are led to the place you 
slaughter them in, as a means of closeness to Allah, so that you are grateful to Allah for the blessing of making them 
submissive to you. 

@ Neither does the meat of the sacrificial animals you present nor their blood ever reach Allah, nor is it raised towards 
Him, but rather your mindfulness of Allah therein is raised towards Him, through your being sincere to Him in your obe¬ 
dience to seek closeness to Him through it. In that way, Allah made them submissive to you, so that you proclaim Allah’s 
greatness, thanking Him for the truth He has guided you to. O Messenger, inform those who are excellent in worshipping 
their Lord and in dealing with His creation what will make them happy. 

(S§§) Allah defends those who have faith from the evil of their enemies. Allah does not love anyone who is treacherous in 
his trust and who rejects the blessings of Allah; in fact, Allah despises him. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Using examples to make intangible forms easy through giving them a physical form is a great educational objective. 

2. Respecting the signs of Allah stems from the piety of the hearts. 3. The one who benefits from obedience is the servant 
himself. 4. Humility is virtuous. 5. The sacrificial animal is amongst the signs of Allah. 6. Feeding the pauper who re¬ 
frains from begging and the beggar is one of the objectives of establishing the sacrifice of animals. 7. The acceptance of 
actions depends on sincerity for Allah. 8. Doing good is a means of good fortune. 9. Faith is a means of Allah defending 
and taking the servant into consideration. 

















i) 

yA; >IK; [0^^0\j0\ 00 

4J^ l^Jj 


“■«» 


-^$A: 


s^L^u^i o^ 

w ^=c~^ 0_y0uS bjij-sl? 

I c5 jj== Jja3^_^jS^4 O^J ($) 

^jLp? 

i_j j5j 3d-£* <4-^>&i^5(^ -L^ 
1^43 j^.1jo 

~j^{3 AaJVIs? c_^9 V^lx^====dj&\ 

£ Jj” o ^, 4 " t^* — ^1 

k?j3 t>a 


j ^ fegki^gftgjj W" V fefciS£& »Irf&fi f After Allah stated that He defends the believers and 

as a result they felt at ease, He gave them permis¬ 
sion to fight the disbelievers, saying: 

3 Allah has given permission to fight to the be¬ 
lievers who are fought by the idolaters, due to their 
being oppressed by their enemies. Allah has the 
power to help the believers against their enemies 
without fighting. However, the wisdom of Allah re¬ 
quired that the believers be tested through fighting 
the disbelievers. 

3 Those whom the disbelievers unjustly exiled 
from their homes, not due to any crime they com¬ 
mitted but because they said: “Our Lord is Allah; 
we have no Lord besides Him”. Had Allah not 
legislated for the prophets and believers fighting 
against their enemies, they would have invaded the 
places of worship, destroying the monasteries of 
the monks, Christian churches, Jewish synagogues, 
and the mosques of the Muslims which have been 
made for prayer and in which the Muslims remem¬ 
ber Allah abundantly. Allah will help those who 
help His religion and Prophet. Allah has power to 
help whoever helps His religion and is Mighty, with 
nobody able to overcome Him. 

3 These people who have been promised help 
are those who, if I were to establish on earth by 
helping them against their enemies, would perform 
prayer in the most perfect manner, give Zakat of 
their wealth, command what the sacred law has 
commanded and forbid what it has forbidden. To 
Allah alone is where matters return, with respect to 
reward and punishment. 

3 O Messenger, if your people reject you, be pa¬ 
tient. You are not the first messenger to be rejected by his people. Before your people, the people of Noah rejected Noah, 
Aad rejected Hud and Thamud rejected Salih. 

@ The people of Abraham rejected Abraham and the people of Lot rejected Lot. 

3 The people of Madyan rejected Shuayb, and Pharaoh and his people rejected Moses. I deferred the punishment from 
their people, to gradually lead them away, then I seized them with the punishment. So contemplate how I reproached 
them; I destroyed them due to their disbelief. 

3 How many cities, which were unjust because of their disbelief, I destroyed with obliterating punishment. Their homes 
are ruined and empty of inhabitants. How many wells are there which have nobody to drink from them, due to their being 
destroyed. How many lofty decorated palaces are there which could not save their residents from the punishment. 

3 Did these people who reject what the Messenger (peace be upon him) brought not travel in the land, to see the remains 
of these destroyed cities, so that they would reflect with their minds to take heed and so that they would to accept their 
stories to learn from them? It is established that blindness is not blindness of eyesight, but rather the blindness which is 
destructive is blindness of insight, where such a person does not reflect or take lessons. 

® Beneficial Points 

1. Striving in Allah’s path is a test for the believer. 

2. All honour and power belongs to Allah. 

3. The legality of striving in Allah’s path is established, to protect places of worship. 

4. Divine help is attached to those who help the religion. 

5. Establishing the religion is a means through which Allah’s assistance is attained for his believing servants. 

6. The Messenger (peace be upon him) was consoled through knowing he is not the only one whose people rejected him 
and the outcome of the rejecters is destruction. 

7. Blindness of the heart is a barrier to reflecting over the signs of Allah. 











\ Al-Hajj 


337 


Part 17 | 




















c}j <~J\ X^ \j 


i3\ 




] Q ^^=6JjJ 'ayajJ^jJ^ C^cil^ \ 4W4? 

4^1 ^Jj 

b£^ii\J]^iii 





;.U 


@ O Messenger, the disbelievers amongst your 
people seek quick punishment in this world and de¬ 
ferred punishment in the Hearafter, when they were 
warned of them. Allah will never break the prom¬ 
ise of it He has made to them. Amongst the quick 
punishment is what befell them on the day of Badr. 

And one day of punishment in the afterlife is like a 
thousand years of what you count in worldly years, 
due to the punishment it contains. 

@ How many towns are there which I gave respite 
to in punishment and which were oppressive due to 
their disbelief. I did not punish them instantly, to 
gradually lead them on, then I seized them by an 
obliterating punishment. To Me alone is their return 
on the Day of Judgment, then I will reward them 
for their disbelief with the everlasting punishment. 

(Sj| O people, I am only a warner to you, conveying 
to you what I have been sent with and clear in my 
warning. 

(jl So those who have faith and did good actions 
will have forgiveness from their Lord for their sins, 
and for them is noble sustenance in paradise which 
will never end. 

(SfJ) Those who strive to deny our verses, believing 
they will be able to render Allah powerless and es¬ 
cape Him so that He cannot punish them, those are 
the people of the fire of hell, staying constantly in it 
just as companions stay with one another. 

(jp O Messenger, I did not send before you any 
messenger or prophet except that when he read the 
Book of Allah, the satan put doubts in his recitation. 

Then Allah would nullify the whisperings the satan 
would put, and establish His verses. Allah knows 
everything, nothing being hidden from Him, and is Wise in His creating, decreeing and planning. 

(jp The satan puts doubts in the recitation of the Prophet so that Allah makes what he puts as a test for the hypocrites and 
those idolaters whose hearts have become hard. The oppressors amongst the hypocrites and idolaters are in enmity of 
Allah and His Messenger, and distance from the truth and guidance. 

@ And so that those whom Allah gave knowledge are convinced that the Qur’an revealed to Muhammad (peace be upon 
him) is the truth Allah revealed to you, O Messenger, thus increasing their faith in it and so that their hearts submit and 
humble themselves before it. Allah is the Guide of those who have faith toward the straight path of truth which contains 
no crookedness, as a reward for their submitting to it. 

{§5 Those who disbelieved in Allah and denied His Messenger will remain in doubt about the Qur’an Allah revealed to 
you, continuing until the Hour comes to them suddenly whilst they are in that condition or the punishment of a day in 
which there is no mercy or good comes to them, and it is the Day of Judgment with respect to them. 

^ Beneficial Points 

1. Injustice is one of the causes of nations being destroyed. 

2. Gradually leading the oppressor away until he exceeds the bounds in his oppression is a divine custom. 

3. Allah has protected His Book from changes and tampering, and He has turned the schemes of the satan’s supporters 
away from it. 

4. Hypocrisy and hardness of the heart are two destructive illnesses. 

5. Knowledge is a means of distinguishing between falsehood and truth. 

6. Faith is the result of knowledge, and humbling and submitting to Allah’ orders is the result of faith. 


jJ\\j 

i j » * .. < 

















T| 


f- 

<J>S\j &^3\ C^r \Ju2j 

<L>\Xs>]J j£> \i^y,x^===^j ]yp2. 


> > 





g>«» 

k>M 


*0jLi^j^a\ol5| 

_j jjt ^3AL4 -M.'j {$> I 

At AA? J^)k_jjL^t ^4y-5^lA^t J 
oy^A ^_lA? ( 3 > Aj'as A\ - ~ ^ 


<0 Supreme authority on the Day of Judgment - the 
day when the punishment these people have been 
promised shall come to them, will only be for Allah 
alone. He will have no competitor for it, and He 
will judge between the believers and the disbeliev¬ 
ers. He will judge for each of them as they deserve: 
those who had faith and performed good deeds will 
be granted a great reward in eternal gardens of ev¬ 
erlasting bounties. 

{§} And those who disbelieved in Allah and rejected 
the signs He revealed unto His Messenger will face 
a humiliating punishment in hell. 

(0 As for those who left their houses and home¬ 
lands in honour of Allah’s religion and seeking 
His pleasure, and were killed whilst striving in His 
path or died, Allah shall grant them an everlasting 
sustenance in paradise. Indeed, Allah is the best of 
sustainers. 

(0 Allah will definitely enter them into a place they 
shall be pleased with. And Allah is well aware of 
their intentions and their deeds; forbearing in that 
He did not punish them hastily on their shortcom¬ 
ings. 

(0 The aforementioned, i.e. those who migrated in 
the path of Allah being entered into paradise, and 
permission for the wronged to avenge justly with¬ 
out incurring sin. If the oppressor returns to his 
oppression, Allah will help the oppressed. Indeed, 
Allah overlooks the sins of the believers and for¬ 
gives them. 

@ The helping of the oppressed is because Allah is 
capable of doing as He wills. From His capabilities 
is entering the night into the day and the day into 
the night, by increasing one and decreasing the other. Allah also hears the statements of His servants and knows of their 
actions; nothing is hidden from Him and He shall requit them accordingly. 

(0 The aforementioned, i.e. entering the night into the day and the day into the night, is because Allah is truly existent, 
and so His religion is the truth, His promise is also true and His helping the believers is also true. The idols that the idol¬ 
aters worship instead of Allah are false and have no basis. And Allah is supreme over His creation in being, in power and 
in subjugation; the Grand to Whom belongs all majesty, grandeur and exaltedness. 

( 0 ) O Messenger! Do you not see that Allah causes rain to fall from the sky, and consequently the earth becomes green 
owing to the vegetation that grows upon it after the rain has fallen? Allah is kind to His servants in that He makes the rain 
fall for them, and makes the earth grow crops. He is also well aware of their requirements; nothing is hidden from Him. 
( 0 ) To Him alone belongs supreme authority of the heavens and the earth. He is The Self-sufficient who is never needy of 
any of His creation; the eternally existent. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The status of migration in Islam and its virtue. 

2. The permissibility of seeking revenge equally. 

3. The help of Allah for the one wronged can come in the world or the Hearafter. 

4. Affirmation of sublime attributes for Allah as befits His exaltedness; like the attributes of hearing, sight and highness. 


jj5 AtSpjf I 

OyCili \ i 4Xs\ A Ji 

0 _I A? | 



















ZS j 5\j- fi L90jL_^ 



@ O Messenger! Do you not see that Allah has 
made the animals and other objects manageable for 
your needs and benefit, and the benefit of the mass¬ 
es? He also made manageable for you the ships that 
sail the oceans with His command; sailing from city 
to city. He also holds back the sky so it does not 
fall onto Earth except with His command; if He al¬ 
lowed it to fall it would. Indeed, Allah is benevolent 
and merciful towards the people such that He made 
these things manageable for them, despite their po¬ 
tential harm. 

@ Allah is the only One Who gave you life, in that 
He gave you existence when you were non-existent. 

He will then cause death upon you when your lives 
expire, and then will revive you after your death to 
hold you to account for your deeds and requit you 
for them. Verily, the human is ever in denial of the 
bounties of Allah, despite their being so clear. 

(jp I have made a set of laws for the people of every 
creed. O Messenger! Let the idolaters and people 
of other creeds not contest with you in your set of 
laws, because you are more deserving of it than 
them as they are the people of falsehood. Invite the 
people towards sincerely proclaiming the oneness 
of Allah; indeed, you are on the straight path, in 
which there is no deviation. 

(jp If they insist on quarrelling with you after the 
evidence has become clear, leave their matter to Al¬ 
lah, warning them and saying: “Allah is most aware 
of the actions you do, none of your actions are hid¬ 
den from Him, and He will requit you for them”. 

(jp Allah will judge between His servants: the be¬ 
lievers and the disbelievers from among them, on 
the Day of Judgment, in the matters of religion they would dispute over in the world. 

fjp O Messenger! Do you not know that Allah knows all that is in the heavens and on Earth; nothing is hidden from Him, 
and His knowledge of it is recorded in the Preserved Tablet. Encompassing the knowledge of it all is very easy for Allah. 
@ The idolaters worship idols instead of Allah; idols which Allah did not reveal any proof of their worship being accept¬ 
able in His books. Neither do they have any proof of their own knowledge; their only object of reliance for that is blind 
following of their forefathers. The wrongdoers will have no helper that will protect them from the punishment of Allah 
that will fall upon them. 

(jp When you recite My clear verses of the Qur’an unto them, you will recognise the objecting frowns of the disbelievers 
when they hear them. It is as if they would violently assault those who recite My verses unto them in extreme anger. O 
Messenger! Say to them: “Shall I inform you of something which is worse than this anger and frowning of yours? It is the 
hellfire which Allah has promised to enter the disbelievers into. How terrible their abode is!” 

Beneficial Points: 

1. From among the bounties of Allah is His making that which is in the heavens and on earth in favour for them. 

2. Affirmation of the attributes of benevolence and mercy for Allah. 

3. The knowledge of Allah encompassing everything that is in the heavens and earth. 

4. Following blindly was the reason the idolaters persisted on their ascribing partners to Allah. 

5. The people of falsehood resort to violence because they are incapable to challenging evidence with evidence. 


C 4*1 0 JJ 

>~ 4ja\ 


0 5 

S3 *4 /-W 






■s& 


* . 0^ 


j 

















© O people! A parable is about to be narrated, so 
listen carefully and take lesson from it! Indeed, 
those idols and other things you worship instead 
of Allah cannot even create a fly despite its small 
size, because of their incompetence. Even if they 
were to convene in trying to do so they would not 
be able to achieve it. And if a fly was to take any¬ 
thing away from them, i.e. perfume etc. they would 
not have the power to reclaim it. By their incapabil¬ 
ity of creating a fly and reclaiming anything from 
it, their incapability of doing anything greater than 
that becomes evident. How can they then worship 
it instead of Allah? This seeker - which is the wor¬ 
shipped idol that is totally incapable of reclaiming 
whatever the fly has taken from it, together with the 
sought-after fly, are both weak. 

@ They did not revere Allah as He deserves to be 
revered when they worshipped some of His crea¬ 
tion along with worshipping Him. Indeed, Allah is 
the Strong, and He created the heavens, the earth 
and everything within them due to this strength and 
power. He is the Almighty who cannot be over¬ 
powered, unlike the idols of the idolaters which are 
weak and powerless to create anything. 

© Allah, may He be glorified, selects messengers 
from the Angels and the people also. He sends 
some of the Angels to the prophets, like Gabriel, 
who He sent to the human messengers; and He also 
sends human messengers to common people. In¬ 
deed, Allah hears what the idolaters say regarding 
His messengers and is insightful of who He selects 
to convey His message. 

© Allah, may He be glorified, is well aware of the 
affairs of His messengers, from both the angels and the people, even before their creation and well after their death. To 
Him alone shall all matters return on the Day of Judgment, when He will resurrect His servants and requit them for the 
actions they sent forth. 

© O you who have believed in Allah and have acted in accordance to the laws He laid down for you! Bow and prostrate 
to Him alone in your prayer; do good by way of charity and enjoining family ties, in hope that you succeed in your ob¬ 
jective and achieve salvation from the feared. 

© And strive in the path of Allah sincerely for His pleasure. He has selected you and made your religion a religion of 
kindness, in which there is no oppression and extremism. This tolerant creed is the creed of your forefather Abraham 
(peace be upon him). Allah has named you ‘Muslims’ in the previous books and in the Qur’an, so that the Messenger can 
be a witness against you in that he conveyed the message he was commanded to convey, and so that you yourselves can 
be witnesses against the previous nations in that their messengers also conveyed their messages respectively. So show 
gratitude to Allah upon that by performing prayer as perfectly as possible, giving Zakat from your wealth, seeking refuge 
in Allah and relying upon Him in all your matters, for He is the best protector for those believers who seek His protection, 
and the best of helpers for those of them who seek His help. So seek His protection, He will protect you, and seek His 
help, He will help you. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The importance of giving examples for clarity of meaning. It is an important method of teaching. 

2. The idols’ incompetence in creating even the most insignificant of things is proof of their incapability of creating 
anything else. 

3. The reason behind ascribing partners to Allah is not revering Him. 

4. Affirmation of the attributes of strength and might for Allah, and the importance of a believer always keeping the 
meanings of these qualities in mind. 

5. Worshipping Allah and doing good leads to success. 

6. There being no difficulty in religion. 




i7yU 






G. . ^ ^ f 


n 

J>= 




j A ^ 


























J3 |j^| 


>y S 0 ^<Stt£ 




0 0 5 ^ 1 ^: 

^Lii^ X3 j0 cL? 

|0O^ 


iSI^aIjL^I jLsli^J ^iii*JU 
ciita XL^>ip0 <jvai^ ^ 

-\J^J 0 OjXx-X d^S^JL}\j^j^===ljl^Jj 0 I 

(^) ^liTUj (3i)P^ ^ j 


The Believers (Surah Al-Mu’minun) 

^ Themes of the Surah: 

The issue of faith, its reality, its fruits, the outcomes 
of its opposition and rebuking the disbelievers. That 
is why the Surah starts with mentioning the success 
of the believers and failure of the disbelievers 

^ Explanation: 

{J} Those who believed in Allah and acted accord¬ 
ing to His laws have indeed succeeded by achieving 
whatever they sought, and gaining salvation from 
whatever they feared. 

(Sj) Those who were humble in their prayer: their 
limbs remained calm during it and their hearts were 
free of distractions. 

@ Those who turned away from falsehood and 
futility, especially those futile actions and speech 
which was sinful. 

| D Those who purified themselves of evil charac¬ 
teristics, and their wealth by taking out Zakat from 
it. 

Cp Those who safeguarded their private parts by 
keeping them far from fornication, homosexuality 
and shameful actions; so they remained pure and 
chaste. 

^ Except using them with their wives or the fe¬ 
male servants they possessed, for they are blame¬ 
less in taking pleasure from them through sexual 
intercourse and the like. 

ij) So whosoever seeks pleasure from other than 
his wives and female servants that he possesses, he 
is transgressing the limits of Allah by delving into 
that which Allah has forbidden, without keeping to 
that which He has kept lawful. 

Cp Those who fulfil and do not neglect or usurp the trusts Allah has entrusted them with, or any of His servants have 
entrusted them with. Rather, they keep to their pacts. 

($ Those who observe their prayers by being punctual in them, by performing them at their correct times together, obli¬ 
gations and preferred actions. 

5D Those possessing these characteristics are the true inheritors. 

J They will inherit the loftiest level of paradise wherein they will live forever. Their bounties will not finish in it. 

@ Verily, I created the father of mankind, Adam, from clay. I took the soil he was created from, from a mixture of water 
and the soil of the earth. 

jj Then I created his progeny who procreate, by way of a drop of sperm that lodges in the womb until birth, 
ijp I then created the lodged drop of sperm into a red clot of blood, which I then created into a piece of flesh, which I then 
created into hard bones. I then covered those bones with flesh and then developed it into a completely different creation, 
by blowing a soul into it and bringing it out into life. Praised is Allah, the best of creators! 
dj) O people! After having passed through all these phases, you shall die when your lives expire. 

(Sjj) Then, after your death, you shall be resurrected from your graves on the Day of Judgment so that you may be held to 
account for whatever deeds you sent forth. 

@ O people! Verily, I created seven heavens over you, one above the other. I am never neglectful of My creation, nor 
am I One to forget it. 

^ Beneficial Points: 

1. There are various means to achieving success. Their recognition is advisable, so too is endeavouring to achieve them. 

2. Gradual progress in creation and legislation is a divine custom. 

3. Allah’s knowledge of His creation is all-encompassing. 


5 Al-Mu’minun 




















\ (3, \ cy^^y^j 

*• m *Z> —- 2 -" -"^ ^ *S>»^ ^ 

^-^==Ri t>V—JL^Vi 0_?_-) -3^-^ 

3 >->cJl>_<? (^) L^lirss^lj L&L* 9 °_j^^ 

H 0 ^1^J%.'^^ jJ&cjt jO^- 

«H| S^a*)c 4 j 

^jsj l jl\j^ \ 9 C^ \j\^ 

A&\ \jX^S>\ -AaS-b < J Vj&3 ^ AAj£ 31^3 Ajajjt ^ ) 

■ “*>^0 a -^^3 ^ . . 9 .*•'*, ^'^S- _ -. -'"' «, -f 

^1 ($) Oy^ ^34 j^p 

U3^2l|\ ^LijL? 

^43^13* 


S^'ZC t' 


g\ 333 ^( 351 


<au3^ 


(jp I sent down rain from the heavens according to 
the need toward it; not in excessive amounts that 
cause ruin, nor too little that is insufficient. I allow 
it to settle on earth so that the people and animals 
can take benefit from it. Otherwise, I am capable of 
causing it to wash away, in which case they would 
not be able to benefit from it. 

{jp Through that water I then created gardens for 
you, the like of palms and grapevines. You have 
fruits of varying colours and appearance that grow 
within them, like figs, pomegranates and apples, of 
which you eat. 

(jp Through that water, I also created the olive tree 
for you, the origins of which come from the land 
of Mount Sinai. From its fruits, the oil is extracted 
which you use and consume. 

@ O people! Indeed, you have a lesson to take from 
grazing livestock (camels, cows and sheep), in that 
you can draw conclusions from them in the power 
of Allah and His kindness to you. He quenches your 
thirst with pure, tasty milk from the bellies of these 
animals. You can also derive other benefits from 
them, like conveyance, wool, fur, bristles, together 
with being able to consume their meat. 

(jp You are carried on the camels on land and on 
the ships at sea. 

(jp Indeed, I sent Noah (peace be upon him) to 
his people to call them towards Allah, so he said 
to them, “O my people! Worship Allah only; you 
do not have any true deity except Him, may He 
be glorified. Will you not be mindful of Allah by 
fulfilling His commands and refraining from His 


prohibitions?” 

{§p So the noblemen and leaders from his people who disbelieved in Allah said to their followers and the masses, “This 
man that claims to be a messenger is only a human like yourselves; he only desires leadership and rule over you. If Allah 
wished to send a messenger to you He would have done so by sending one from the angels, not from the humans. We 
have not heard anything like what he is claiming from our predecessors!” 

j|P He is only a man who is mad. He does not understand what he himself is saying. Wait and see when soon his true 
reality becomes apparent to the people. 

(jP Noah (peace be upon him) said, “O my Lord! Help me against them and pay them back for their rejection and defi¬ 
ance!” 

(jp So I revealed to him: Make a ship under My supervision and tutorage. Then, when My command to destroy them 
is issued and water gushes forth from the place where bread is baked, start taking a male and female from every living 
species onto the ship, so that they can procreate and not become extinct. Also take your family on board, except for those 
upon whom Allah’s decree of destruction has been passed i.e. your wife and son. Do not request Me to save and not 
destroy those who have wronged through disbelief; there is no doubt they shall be destroyed by drowning in the water 
of the flood. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Allah’s kindness towards His servants is evident by His sending down rain and making it easy to benefit from it. 

2. Reference is made to the status of the olive tree. 

3. There is a lesson to be learnt from the livestock being sub-servient for the people. 

4. The idolaters’ belief of the divinity of the stone while rejecting the prophethood of a human being is clear evidence of 
their foolishness. 

5. Allah’s help and victory for His messengers occurs after their people reject their message. 




Al-Mu’minun 

343 


Part 18 | 















© When you board the ship together with the be 
lievers achieving salvation, say: “All praise is for ^ 
Allah Who saved us from the disbelieving people 
and destroyed them.” 

© And say: “O my Lord! Cause me to disembark 
at a blessed place, for You are the best of those who 
cause to disembark.” 

© Indeed, in the aforementioned, i.e. saving Noah 
and the believers with him, and destroying the dis¬ 
believers, are great signs of My ability to help My 
messengers and destroy their rejecters. I had tested 
the people of Noah by sending him to them, so that 
the believers and disbelievers, the obedient and sin¬ 
ners become distinct. 

© Thereafter, I created a different generation of 
people after destroying the people of Noah. They 
were the Ad, the people of Hud (peace be upon 
him). 

© I sent to them a messenger from amongst them: 
Hud, who would call them towards Allah. He said 
to them, “O my people! Worship Allah only; you 
do not have any true deity except Him, may He 
be glorified. Will you not be mindful of Allah by 
fulfilling His commands and refraining from His 
prohibitions?” 


1 

1 

vs 



\j\jS\y 0 \j&. 

]jxs% J {^) Crt 

I 








s 




(&) | 

)XJi o ^($) o \^Si -z (^) 

B) The noblemen and leaders from his people who ^ ^ xTsr $ */\ , \ ~J .f 

lisbelieved in Allah, rejected the Hereafter and the Jl U j <4^ 1 


>J4rl 






disbelieved in Allah, rejected the Hereafter and the 
punishment and reward to be meted out in it, and 
were misled by the blessings I had granted them in 
the world, said to their followers and masses, “This 
is a human just like you are: he eats of the food you 
eat and drinks of the drinks you drink. He does not 
have any superiority over you such that he would 
be sent as a messenger to you!” 

© “And if you were to follow a human just like you, you would indeed have been deceived into leaving aside your deities 
and following one who has no virtue over you.” 

© “Does this man who claims to be a messenger promise you that when you die and become dust and decomposed 
bones, that you shall leave your graves alive? Is this even conceivable?!” 

© The promise you are being given in being taken out of your graves alive after you have died and turned into dust and 
decomposed bones, is very far from reality. 

© The only life is the life of this world, not the afterlife. The living from among us die and are not revived, whilst others 
are born and live. We are not going to be taken out after we have died, to be taken to account on the Day of Judgment. 

© Hud, who claims he is a messenger, has only fabricated a lie unto Allah by this claim of his; we are not going to 
believe him. 

© Hud said, “O my Lord! Help me against them and pay them back for their rejection and defiance!” 

© Allah responded to him, saying, “Very soon, these people who have rejected the message you have brought to them 
will regret their rejection.” 

© So a severe scream, accompanied by a severe wind, took them by surprise, due to their deserving the punishment 
owing to their stubbornness. I destroyed them, leaving them like the froth of the flood. Woe be to the transgressing nation! 
© Then, after destroying them, I created other peoples and nations, like the nation of Lot, Shu‘ayb and Jonah. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The obligation of praising Allah for His blessings. 

2. Luxury in this world is outwardly a blessing, but in reality a test. 

3. The idolaters’ rejection of resurrection is a result of their materialistic ideology. 

4. The end result of a disbeliever is regret and loss. 

5. Transgression is a means of being distanced from the mercy of Allah. 

















io 




I ■> 'J J? ^ ^ -- c c. 9 •*" 

(^) \-^-L=>-\ 4j>l ^(3^2^ 1^ 

| Ul^) \V ^ /y^ \ XzL$ cu> ^ 

I ^ (^) CA-c^©U>-^ r^» 

lliju ££r^&$ ^^S($) 

G3^j3j (^) 

JJ^-3 0^ij?j>L) ^ * 3 ^i/ 3 o? 

^Ji!^ 

I V ^ i 

^-^==^^oj^£)l5C^D >- 


j i>= 

4#,* 


>^■2 J^ 4 ) 

jP* X«? \jat\i ) j^ (o^ cl)j^>2>3 

O^jJLiaSl (J^ 0)^4 (^) CA^j JlS Cjt^^i 

csJh ]j oi($) 

(^) ^ o^iJlS ($) 


345 



@ None of these rejecting nations will precede the 
time fixed for their destruction, nor will they be de¬ 
layed from it, regardless of whatever means they 
have at their disposal. 

@ I then sent My messengers in succession, one af¬ 
ter the other. Each time the Messenger came to his 
nation he was sent to they rejected him, so I succes¬ 
sively destroyed them, leaving nothing except for 
the tales of people regarding them. So destruction 
be to the nation that does not believe in the message 
brought to it by a messenger sent to it! 

@ I then sent Moses and his brother Aaron with 
nine of My signs: the Staff, the Hand, locusts, lice, 
frogs, blood, floods, drought and shortage of pro¬ 
duce, and with clear proof. 

@ I sent them both to Pharaoh and the noblemen 
of his people, but they displayed arrogance and did 
not submit to believing in them. They were a people 
who imposed themselves upon people by subduing 
and oppressing them. 

@ So they said, “Should we believe two humans 
like us, who have no superiority over us and their 
tribe (the Israelites) are submissive and obedient to 
us?” 

@ So they rejected whatever message they brought 
to them from Allah. And because of their rejection, 
they were destroyed by drowning. 

@ Verily, I gave Moses the Torah in the hope that 
his people would be guided to the truth through it 
and implement its teachings. 

@ I also made Jesus and his mother Mary signs in¬ 
dicating My capability; she conceived him without 
a father. I granted them shelter in an elevated place 


on earth, an even, habitable place which had fresh flowing water. 

@ O Messengers! Eat from the appealing food that I have made lawful for you, and perform good deeds in accordance to 
the laws of Allah. Indeed, I am ever aware of every action of yours; none of your actions are hidden from Me. 

@) O Messengers! Indeed, your creed is one creed: it is Islam. And I am your Lord, you do not have a Lord other than 
Me, so be mindful of Me by fulfilling My commands and refraining from My prohibitions. 

{§§) After they passed away, their followers were divided in religion and became sects and groups, with each group con¬ 
ceited in believing that whatever it believed in was the true acceptable religion according to Allah, disregarding the views 
of anyone else. 

C|p O Messenger! Leave them in the ignorance and confusion they are in, until the punishment descends upon them. 

|jS) Do these self-conceited groups think that whatever wealth and offspring we bestow them with in the world, is a 
prelude of good they deserve? It is not as they think; I am only giving it to them as respite, gradually leading them into 
destruction, but they do not realise it. 

@ Do these self-conceited groups think that whatever wealth and offspring we bestow them with in the world, is a 
prelude of good they deserve? It is not as they think; I am only giving it to them as respite, gradually leading them into 
destruction, but they do not realise it. @ Indeed, those who, despite their belief and good, are fearful of their Lord. @ 
And those who believe in the universal and religious signs of their Lord. @ And those who proclaim the oneness of their 
Lord, without ascribing anything to Him as partner. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Allah’s care for His servants by sending consecutive messengers to them, until finally sealing them with our Prophet, 
peace and blessings be with him and all prophets. 

2. Arrogance is a barrier to being able to recognise the truth. 

3. Consuming good food is a quality of the Allah-conscious servants of Allah. 

4. Monotheism is the creed of all prophets and their call. 

5. Bestowing a transgressor with favours is not honouring him; it is gradually leading him into destruction. 



















ljJ^S/j (^j oyL*!^ yi/^<\cyy^ 

CyLxy^i^ -4j [Hi 

S^^J^-J \ ^ OtXj^ <4 0 1 

(^) y^y^O y====iL^ ^p<J^) ^ 

^ jj^ ^ L?^“f Jo (^} 

J^y^l&-*i3^ ($) 0^33 ^oljj^Uy^^U- 

& jj O^jAJ ja\( ^ L)_9$^»* 94 ] 



© Those who strive in doing righteous deeds and 
draw closer to Allah through them, whilst fearing 
that He may not accept their spending in His path, 
or good deeds when they return to Him on the Day 
of Judgment. 

© Those possessing these lofty characteristics has¬ 
ten towards good deeds, and beat others in perform¬ 
ing them. That is why they surpass everyone else. 

© I do not burden any soul except with whatever 
actions are within its capability. I have a book in 
which I have recorded all the deeds of every doer; 
it shows the undisputable truth. The people will not 
be wronged by having their good deeds decreased 
or evil deeds increased. 

© Rather, the hearts of the disbelievers are ne¬ 
glectful of this book that contains the truth, and of 
the book that was revealed to them. They also com¬ 
mit evil actions other than the disbelief that they 
are insistent on. 

© Until when I punish those among them who 
lived in luxury in the world with the punishment on 
the Day of Judgment, they shall raise their voices 
calling out for help. 

© It will be said to them, depriving them of all 
hope in the mercy of Allah, “Do not scream and do 
not call for help today! There is no helper for you 
today who can help you against the punishment of 
Allah. 

© Verily, the verses of Allah would be recited to 
you in the world, but you would turn away from 
them when you heard them, in hatred for them. 

© You did that displaying arrogance over the peo¬ 
ple, because you thought you were the people of 
the sanctuary while you were not; the true people of the sanctuary are the Mindful. You also talked ill of it by night and 
would not deem it sacred. 

© Will these idolaters not ponder over the Qur’an Allah has revealed, bring faith in it and implement its teachings? Or is 
it that something has come to them which did not come to their predecessors, so they turned away from it and rejected it? 
© Or is it that they do not recognise Muhammad peace be upon him whom Allah has sent to them, and so they reject 
him? Verily, they recognise him, his truthfulness and his honesty. 

© Rather, do they say, “He is insane!”? Surely, they have lied. Rather, the truth has come to them, undisputably from 
Allah. The majority of them dislike the truth, hating it due to the jealousy within themselves and fanaticism over their 
falsehood. 

© If Allah was to have let matters run and arrange them in accordance to their desires, the heavens, earth and all their 
inhabitants would fall into ruin due to their ignorance of the outcome of matters, and their inability to differentiate be¬ 
tween good and bad plans. 

© O Messenger! Have you asked for a fee from these people for what you brought to them, which has made them reject 
your call? You have not done as such; the reward of your Lord is far better than the reward any of these people can give. 
He, may He be glorified, is the best of providers. 

© O Messenger! Indeed, you call these people and others towards a straight path which has no deviation: it is the path 
of Islam. 

© And indeed those who do not believe in the Hearafter; accountability, punishment and reward, incline towards other 
paths which lead to the hellfire. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The believer should fear his good deeds not being accepted. 2. Out of Allah’s mercy for His servants, they are not 
obliged to do things beyond their capabilities. 3. Affluence is one of the barriers to steadfastness, and is a means to de¬ 
struction. 4. Arrogance is a barrier from guidance reaching the hearts. 5. The human intellect is incapable of understand¬ 
ing many requirements. 6. Not believing in reward and punishment is one way that leads to deviation and misguidance. 


is Oj 


0. 


1 i'jp j? Wfy j^ <1)U 


346 
















£ . * \ S ) cu^ 









Jjajj l)j^lLjc_ 

Jo-k-£> c^AotatjljL o>c^9 13 

o*S^ \ &S Ip cs ii. iy*^ ($) o/£C^ l5 Slas d j^J\j 

J&tftijd *43 ^ jfe0 ^^4lS 

jlsU L3 J^(^) ^^jgljJo ^ 

lj $1 L>^i^lij^ lx_3^\i \jJ\S{^) \ 

-L2g5(^) ^ J ^jjlZ^] 

0 6^ 

^Ji 0^L^jui js (^) 

o)a4^j 

c/^JsA 0 >< 


*i© AljO 
9, 


347 


@ If I were to have mercy on them and lift their 
famine and hunger, they would continue being mis¬ 
guided from the truth, being confused and stum¬ 
bling. 

@ I tested them through different afflictions, but 
neither did they humble before their Lord or submit 
to Him nor did they pray to Him submissively so 
that He lifts the afflictions from them when they 
befall. 

@ Until when I opened a door of severe punish¬ 
ment on them, they became hopeless of every ease 
and good. 

As denying the resurrection does not occur from 
those who have the faculties of knowledge, namely 
hearing, vision and intellect, Allah reminded them 
of what He favoured them thereof, saying: 

@ O deniers of the resurrection, Allah is the One 
Who created for you hearing to listen with, vision 
to see with, and hearts to ponder with, but despite 
that, you do not thank Him for these favours except 
a little. 

(jp O people, it is He Who created you on earth, and 
to Him alone you will be raised for reckoning and 
reward on the Day of Judgment. 

(SjJ) And it is He alone Who gives life; there is no¬ 
body who gives life besides Him. And it is He alone 
Who gives death; there is nobody who gives death 
besides Him. To Him alone belongs fixing the dif¬ 
ference of night and day, in terms of darkness and 
light, and length and shortness. Do you not under¬ 
stand His power and His being alone in creating 
and managing? 

@ But they said what their forefathers and prede¬ 


cessors in disbelief said. 

@ They said, unbelievingly and denyingly: “When we die and turn into dust and decomposed bones, will we be raised 
alive to be reckoned? 

We were promised this, i.e. resurrection after death, and so were our predecessors promised this before, but we did not 
see this promise fulfilled. These are only the false tales and lies of the previous people”. 

@ O Messenger, say to these disbelievers who deny the resurrection: “Who does this earth and those on it belong to, if 
you have any knowledge?” 

@ They will say: “The earth and all upon it belong to Allah”, so say to them: “Do you not then remember that the One 
to Whom belong the earth and all upon it has the power to restore you to life after you die?” 

jjj) Say to them: “Who is the Lord of the seven heavens and who is the Lord of the Great Throne, besides which there is 
no bigger creation?” 

@ They will say: “The seven heavens and the Great Throne are the property of Allah”, so say to them: “Will you not 
then by mindful of Allah by carrying out His orders and refraining from His prohibitions, so that you are saved from His 
punishment?” 

Say to them: “Who is the One in whose hand is the realm of everything, with nothing escaping His realm, Who helps 
whom He wants from His servants, with nobody being able to protect whom He intends bad for so as to remove punish¬ 
ment from Him, if you have any knowledge?” 

@ They will say: “In Allah’s hands belong all things”, so say to them: “So how do you lose your senses and worship 
others besides Him, whilst you profess to that?” 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The disbelievers not considering the blessings or calamities that befall them is a sign of their corrupt nature. 2. Being 
ungrateful for blessings is a quality of the unbelievers. 3. Holding onto blind following stops one reaching the truth. 

4. Affirming the Lordship of Allah will not save a person unless it is accompanied with affirming He alone is worthy of 
worship. 





















@) The matter is not as they claim. But rather, I 
have brought them the truth in which there is no 
doubt. They are lying in their claiming a partner 
and child for Allah. Allah is far above what they 
say. 

@ Allah has not taken a child as the disbelievers 
claim, nor is there any true deity alongside Him. 

If there were to be any true deity alongside Him, 
every deity would take his share of the creation he 
made and they would dominate one another, caus¬ 
ing the order of the Universe to become corrupt. 

The reality is that none of this has occurred, prov¬ 
ing that the true deity is Allah alone. He is pure 
and holy of what the idolaters describe Him with, 
namely partners and children which are unbefitting 
for Him. 

He is Knowing of everything hidden from His 
creation and Knowing of everything which can be 
seen and perceived through the senses. None of this 
is hidden from Him. Allah is above having a part¬ 
ner. 

O Messenger, say: “O Lord, if you show me 
regarding these idolaters the punishment You have 
promised them. 

@ O Lord, if You punish them and I am witnessing 
that, do not make me amongst them so that I would 
be afflicted with the punishment that afflicts them”. 

@ I have power to make you witness and see the 
punishment I am promising them. I am not power¬ 
less to do this or anything else. 

@ O Messenger, repel the one who is bad to you 
by the characteristic which is better, namely turning 
away from him and being patient with his harm. I 
know best the associating partners and denial they describe, and the unbefitting things they describe you with such as 
magic and insanity. @ And say: “O Lord, I seek protection in You against the evil suggestions of the satans and their 
whisperings. @ And I seek refuge in You that they should be present with me in any of my affairs”. (S§§) Until when death 
comes to one of these idolaters and he sees what is going to befall him, he says regretfully over his life that has escaped 
him and his deficiency regarding Allah: “O Lord, return me to the worldly life. |f| Perhaps I will do good actions when 
I return to it. Never. The matter is not as you requested. It is only a statement he is uttering. If he were to return to the 
worldly life, he would not fulfil what he promised. These people who have died will remain in a barrier between the 
world and the afterlife until the Day of Resurrection and rising. Thus, they will not return from it to the world, to make 
up for what they lost and to correct what they spoiled. (||| Then when the angel appointed to blow the Trumpet will blow 
the second time which will announce the Day of Judgment, there will be no relations between them to boast through, 
due to their being engrossed in the horrors of the Hearafter, and they will not question one another due to their being 
engrossed in what concerns them. @1 So whoever’s scales are heavy because of his good actions outweighing his bad 
actions, those are the successful ones, by attaining their objective and being saved from their fears. @ And whoever’s 
scales are light because of his bad deeds outweighing his good deeds, those are the ones who have wasted themselves by 
doing that which is harmful to them, i.e., disbelief and sins, and leaving faith and good actions that were beneficial for 
them. They will be in the fire of hell forever and will not come out of it. |fj The fire will burn their faces. Therein, their 
top and bottom lips will shrink away from their teeth, due to severe frowning. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The stability of the system of the Universe is proof for the oneness of Allah. 2. Allah’s knowledge encompasses 
everything. 3. Behaving well with a wrongdoer is a great part of Islamic etiquette which has a deep effect on the op¬ 
ponent. 4. It is important to seek refuge in Allah against the whisperings of the satan and his tricks. 5. The disbeliever 
will be regretful when regret will not benefit. 6. Consideration on the Day of Judgment will be of actions, not lineage. 
7. The intense horrors of the Day of Judgment will make one forget the ties of lineage and relations. 8. Numerous good 
actions are the means of good fortune and numerous bad deeds are the means of wretchedness. 






2 E A'l * > 9 



JSj (vT) | 

<0 s* $ p's. \ 


j ? * 






"A 

ht 





















dll \S\j b xo c )^> LgXf 

Hi \ X Uo Oj^j £<3t^ O^j a^($) Q^s^o^5 

Jj ( na) \Jj3- oo)j I 2 JJap\$ 

^06^^\JJtj^\ \J>%^[ 4i 
<jia*$5l j^S li | 

>i=»\jJ Si ^>iXJ oi ($) Oi-^^fJi 



} It will be said to rebuke them: “Were the verses 
of the Qur’an not recited to you in the world but 
you used to deny them?” 

They will say: “Our Lord, our wretchedness 
which had already passed in Your knowledge over¬ 
came us, and we were a people astray from the 
truth. 

) Our Lord, take us out of the fire. If we return to 
the disbelief and misguidance we were upon, we 
will surely have wronged ourselves and our excuse 
will be broken”. 

) Allah will say: “Sit in the fire and stay in there 
disgraced; never speak to me. 

|f| There was a group of My servants who believed 
in Me, saying: ‘Our Lord, we have believed in You, 
so forgive our sins and grant us Your mercy, and 
You are the best of those who show mercy’ 

) You took these believers who called upon their 
. Lord as a joke, mocking them and making fun of 
them, until being engrossed in mocking them made 
you forget Allah’s remembrance and you used to 
laugh at them, jokingly and mockingly. 

@ I rewarded these believers with success through 
paradise on the Day of Judgment, due to their pa¬ 
tience on Allah’s obedience and the harm they used 
to receive from you”. 

When they ask to be returned to the world to cor¬ 
rect what they spoiled, He will remind them of the 
lifespans they had been given, which made it possi¬ 
ble for them to repent had they intended that. 

I He will say: “How many years did you spend on 
earth? And how much time did you waste therein?” 

» They will reply by saying: “We stayed for one 
day or part of a day, so ask those who pay attention to counting days and months”. 

(@) He will say: “You only stayed in the world for a short period, in which it was easy to persevere upon obedience, if 
only you knew the length of your stay”. 

HI So do you think, O people, that I created you as a plaything without any wisdom, so that there will be no reward or 
punishment as with animals, and that you will not return to Me on the Day of Judgment for the reckoning and recom¬ 
pense?” 

@ So pure is Allah, the King, who does as He wishes with His creation, and Who Himself is True, His promise is true 
and His saying is true. There is no true deity besides Him, Lord of the Noble Throne which is the biggest creation. He 
Who is Lord of the biggest creation is Lord of all the creation. 

@ Whoever calls upon another Allah besides Allah for which he has no proof (and this is the case with every Allah be¬ 
sides Allah), the reward of his bad action is with his Lord, as He is the One Who will reward him for it by punishing him. 
The disbelievers will not be successful in attaining what they desire and being saved from their fears. 

HI Say - O Messenger: “O Lord, forgive my sins, grant me Your mercy, and You are the best of those who show mercy”. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The disbeliever is lowly and disgraced in the eyes of Allah. 

2. Mocking the righteous is a great sin which makes the perpetrator deserving of punishment. 

3. Being patient upon harm is one of the qualities of the believers. 

4. Wasting one’s life is one of the necessary outcomes of disbelief. 

5. Success is the share of the believers whilst loss is the share of the disbelievers. 

6. Praising Allah is one of the displays of etiquette in supplication. 































The Light (Surah an-Nur) 

® Themes of the Surah: 

It focuses on the issue of chastity, concealment, pu¬ 
rity of the Muslim community and keeping it pure 
of the causes of immoral behaviour, and the schem¬ 
ing of the hypocrites in spreading it. 

^Explanation: 

{J} This is a surah I revealed, made acting upon 
its rulings necessary and in which I revealed clear 
verses, in the hope that you will be reminded of the 
rulings it contains and then practice them. 

The unmarried fornicating man and woman - 
flog each one of them with a hundred lashes, and no 
softness or mercy should affect you, whereby you 
do not establish the fixed punishment upon them or 
you make it lighter for them, if you believe in Allah 
and the Last Day. And a group of believers should 
be present when the fixed punishment is being exe¬ 
cuted on them, to go to the limit of publicising their 
crime, and to deter them and others. 

(JfJ) A fornicating man does not incline to marry ex¬ 
cept a fornicating woman like himself or an idolater 
who does not stay away from fornication. A forni¬ 
cating woman does not incline to marry except a 
fornicating man like herself or an idolater who does 
not stay away from it. And marrying a fornicating 
male and female has been forbidden for believers. 

@ Those who accuse chaste women of adultery 
(and chaste men likewise) and do not then bring 
four witnesses to testify to the adultery they have 
accused them of, flog them, O leaders, with eighty 
lashes, and never accept their testimony. Those who 
accuse chaste women are out of the obedience of Allah. 

@ Except those who repent to Allah after what they have done and correct their actions, for Allah will accept their repent¬ 
ance and their testimony. Allah is Forgiving to those of His servants who repent and is Merciful to them. 

(Sj) And those men who accuse their wives but do not have witnesses to testify to the authenticity of what they have ac¬ 
cused them of besides themselves, one amongst them will testify by Allah four times: that he is truthful in the accusation 
of adultery he has made against his wife. 

(Sjj) Then on his fifth testimony, he will add that he is deserving of curse if he is lying in what he has accused her of. 

Through this she will be deserving of the fixed punishment for adultery. She will repel this fixed punishment by tes¬ 
tifying by Allah four times: that he is lying in what he has accused her of. 

CJJ) Then on her fifth testimony, she will add that the anger of Allah be on her if he is truthful in what he has accused her of. 
@ Had it not been for Allah’s grace on you, O people, and His mercy on you, and that He accepts those who repent 
amongst His servants and is Wise in His managing and legislating, He would have quickly punished you for your sins 
and disgraced you through them. 

Beneficial Points: 

1. Any type of discussion concerning great matters should be done in such a way as to indicate their greatness. 

2. The fornicator loses respect and mercy in the Muslim community. 

3. Implementing the fixed punishments is amongst the means of protecting against crimes. 

4. The social boycott against fornicators is a means of protecting the community against them, and a means of deterring 
them from adultery. 

5. Categorising the punishment of one who accuses of adultery into a tangible punishment (the fixed punishment) and an 
immaterial one (rejecting his testimony and labelling him as immoral) is proof to the danger of this action. 


9 r. _ 

0^ jJq Si i(£} \J^ 

jL>\y 515 j Sjjjj (^) 





















M 


•Jr" 


0 \ 




33 V^-XIa)^ 

^Lj3}\S ?\ x^J ^i U \j>\^>3 '-3 iU>J^ a^j ll>- 

j 4^t >-A 4ji\ ALP 

^ J AjJaAj i[ 

id# xj^y^j life 

oUA 


;^4j 




^>3) 


p Those that brought the slander (which was ac¬ 
cusing the Mother of the Believers Aishah - may 
Allah be pleased with her - of adultery) are a group 
which affiliate themselves to you, O believers. Do 
not consider the slander they made as bad for you, 
but rather it is good, due to the reward and testing 
of the believers it contains, and due to the clearing 
the name of the Mother of the Believers it brings 
with it. For each person who shared in accusing her 
of adultery is the reward of the sin he earned, due to 
uttering the slander. And for the one who bore the 
majority of that by starting it is a great punishment. 
The one meant by that is the leader of the hypo¬ 
crites, Abdullah ibn Ubayy ibn Salool. 

| When the believers heard this great slander, why 
did they not believe the faultlessness of their be¬ 
lieving brothers who were accused of that and say: 
“This is a clear lie”? 

© Why did those who accuse the Mother of the Be¬ 
lievers Aishah (may Allah be pleased with her) not 
bring four witnesses upon their grave accusation, to 
9 ^ ^ ^ 0 <>?' 'Z- ** ' g2T testify to the authenticity of what they attributed to 

l)\\ Xj>\ g AlgJ \j l)\ jgr her? But if they do not bring four witnesses on that, 

and they will never be able to bring them, they are 
liars in the order of Allah. 

@ Had it not been for Allah’s grace on you, O be¬ 
lievers, and His mercy on you, as He did not quick¬ 
ly punish you and He accepted the repentance of 
those amongst you who repented, a great punish¬ 
ment would have afflicted you, due to the lie and 
accusation against the Mother of the Believers you 
delved into. 

@ When you were relating it from one another and 
passing it to one another through your mouths, despite its falsehood, you had no knowledge. You were thinking that is 
easy and light, whereas it is grave in the sight of Allah, due to it containing lying and accusing an innocent person. 

© Why did you not say when you heard this slander: “It is not right for us to talk about this gross matter. Purity belongs 
to You, our Lord. This slander which they accused the Mother of the Believers of is a great lie”? 

© Allah reminds you and advises you so that you do not repeat such a slander and accuse an innocent person of adultery, 
if you believe in Allah. 

@ Allah makes clear for you the verses which comprise His rulings and advices. Allah is Knowing of your actions, 
nothing of them being hidden from Him and He shall reward you for them, Wise in His managing and His legislating. 
© Those who love for immoral acts to spread amongst the believers, one of them being to accuse of adultery, for them 
is a painful punishment in the world, by the fixed punishment of slander being executed upon them, and for them is the 
fire of Hell in the Hearafter. Allah knows their lies and the outcome of His servants’ matter, and He knows what is best 
for them and you do not know that. 

© Had it not been for Allah’s grace upon you, O you who fell into the slander, and His mercy on You, and had it not been 
that Allah is compassionate and merciful to you, He would have punished you quickly. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The hypocrites focus on breaking the centres of reliance in the Muslim community, by spreading false accusations. 

2. The hypocrites sometimes tempt some of the believers to join them in their actions. 

3. A believer’s affliction is an expiation for his sins and raising of his status. 

4. The Mother of the Believers Aishah (may Allah be pleased with her) was honoured by having her innocence declared 
from above the seven heavens. 

5. The punishment of those sharing in a sin varies according to their role therein. 

6. It is necessary to remain firm in the face of false rumours. 

7. Adultery is not established except through evidence, and claiming it without evidence is slander. 

8. Staying far from taking part in spreading lies is what is befitting a believer. 


I %S\ ol o ££ 


an-Nur 






















"or 




\ O^J ££j} I L^ls # 
^^^^====cJ^\j CS^b^- 

L \^r\ j y, yO^j ^jL Sc- <^)5 ' 9 ^kcf 


iil^jcO' 


Ji. 


@ O those who have faith in Allah and who act 
on His sacred law, do not follow the ways of the 
satan in his adornment of falsehood. Whoever fol¬ 
lows his ways - he commands despicable actions 
and sayings, and what the sacred law disapproves 
of. Had it not been for Allah’s grace upon you, O 
believers, not a single one of you would have be¬ 
come pure through repentance if he did repent, but 
in fact, Allah purifies whom He wants by accepting 
his repentance. Allah is Hearing of your statements, 

Knowing of your actions; nothing of them is hidden 
from Him and He shall reward you for them. 

|J) The people of virtue in religion and expanse in 
wealth should not swear an oath to stop giving their 
needy relatives, due to their poverty, amongst the 
migrants in Allah’s way, due to a sin they commit¬ 
ted. They should pardon them and overlook them. 

Do you not love that Allah should forgive your sins 
when you pardon them and overlook them? Allah 
is Forgiving to those who repent amongst His serv¬ 
ants and Merciful to them, so His servants should 
follow Him. This verse was revealed regarding Abu 
Bakr Siddiq (may Allah be pleased with him) when 
he swore an oath to stop spending on Mistah, due to 
his joining in the slander. 

Those who accuse chaste innocent women of 
adultery the believing women are unaware of are 
removed from the mercy of Allah in this world and 
the Hearafter, and for them is a great punishment in 
the Hearafter. 

@ They will get that punishment on the Day of 
Judgment, the day when their tongues will testify 
against them as to the falsehood they spoke, and 
their hands and feet will testify against them as to what they used to do. 

On that day, Allah will give them their full reward with justice and they will know Allah is the Truth. Every piece of 
information, promise or warning that comes from Him is clearly true without any doubt in it. 

djl) Every evil man, woman, saying and action is suited to what is evil and conforms to it, and every good thing of that is 
suited to what is good and conforms to it. Those good men and women are innocent of what the evil men and women say 
about them. For them is forgiveness from Allah through which He will forgive their sins, and for them is noble sustenance 
which is paradise. 

As seeing the private parts is a means of inciting desires which lead to committing adultery which was mentioned in the 
beginning of the chapter, Allah ordered seeking permission to enter houses, to protect the gaze from falling on private 
parts, saying: 

(jj3) O those who have faith in Allah and act on His sacred law, do not enter houses besides your own houses until you seek 
permission from their inhabitants to enter them and you greet them, by saying in greeting and seeking permission: “Peace 
be on you, can I come in?” That seeking permission you have been ordered is better for you than entering suddenly, so 
that you remember what you have been ordered and then carry it out. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The deception of the satan and his whisperings are a call towards committing sins, so a believer should refrain from it. 

2. The ability to repent and do good deeds is from Allah, not from the servant. 

3. The people of virtue and excellence are far from taking revenge and treating one who does bad in a like manner. 

4. Forgiving and overlooking one who does bad is a means of sins being forgiven. 

5. Slandering chaste women is amongst the major sins. 

6. That which befits evil is its like and that which befits good is its like. 

7. Seeking permission has been legislated to protect the gaze and to preserve the sanctity of homes. 




0 C>Jyj>3 























-Ap^^Uo 



15J41A^o'^4- 



b^jA^A O^A^H 
b^jA- ^A3b^A3lyAJ^. «fc>'*$ b^AbA 

i>4|LJl 3\ Lg~ii' i>^P"iLg“i}^ (lr%c^"l3^ 


But if you do not find anyone in those houses, 
do not enter them until you are permitted to enter 
by those who have the authority to give permission. 
And if their owners tell you to return, return and do 
not enter them, as this is purer for you in the sight 
of Allah. Allah is Knowing of what you do; none 
of your actions are hidden from Him and He shall 
reward you for them. 

@> There is no blame on you, for entering without 
permission, public houses which are not specifical¬ 
ly for any person and which have been prepared for 
general benefit, such as libraries and shops in mar¬ 
kets. Allah knows the actions and conditions which 
you display and which you hide; none of that is hid¬ 
den from Him and He shall reward you for them. 
As the gaze is the precursor to fornication, Allah 
ordered lowering of the gaze to be saved from it. 
He said: 

O Messenger, tell the believing men to stop their 
eyes from looking at women and private parts that 
are unlawful for them, and to protect their private 
parts from indulging in the unlawful and from ex¬ 
posing them. That refraining from looking at what 
Allah has made unlawful is purer for them in the 
sight of Allah. Allah is Aware of what you do. 

@ And tell the believing women to stop their eyes 
from looking at the private parts Allah has made 
unlawful for them to look at and to protect their 
private parts by staying far from indecency and by 
covering themselves. And they should not display 
their beauty to strangers except that which is ap¬ 
parent thereof and which cannot be hidden, such as 
clothing. They should draw their coverings over the 
openings at the top of their clothes, to cover their hair, faces and necks, and they should not expose their hidden beauty 
except to their husbands, or their fathers, or their husbands’ fathers, or their sons, or their husbands’ sons, or their broth¬ 
ers, or their brothers’ sons, or their sisters’ sons, or their women who are believers, be they Muslim or disbelievers, or the 
servants they own, be they male or female, or male attendants who have no desire for women, or children who have not 
become aware of the private aspects of women due to their being small. And women should not strike their feet with the 
intention of making known the adornment they are hiding, such as anklets and so forth. And all of you repent to Allah, 
O believers, for the gaze and so forth which affects you, in the hope that you are successful in attaining the goal and are 
saved from what is feared. 

Beneficial Points: 

1. It is permissible to enter public buildings without permission. 

2. It is necessary for men and women to lower their gazes from what is unlawful for them. 

3. It is necessary for a woman to cover herself, with the Islamic Hijab. 

4-It is permissible for a woman to display her beauty to her husband or to those who are unlawful to marry due to kinship 
or marriage relations. 

5. It is impermissible to use means of incitement. 









AbAbA 






an-Nur 


Part 18 


















As remaining unmarried is a means of the spread 
of adultery, Allah ordered to help those who are un¬ 
married to marry, saying: 

@ O believers, marry off the unmarried free men 
and women amongst you, and marry off the believ¬ 
ers amongst your male and female servants. If they 
are poor, Allah will make them wealthy through His 
vast grace. Allah is Vast in sustaining, without His 
making anyone wealthy decrease His sustenance, 
and Knowing of the conditions of His servants. 

After Allah ordered the believers to marry off those 
who are unmarried, He ordered the unmarried per¬ 
son to remain chaste if he does not possess anything 
to marry with, saying: 

(jp Those who are unable to marry due to their 
poverty should seek chastity from fornication until 
Allah makes them wealthy through His vast grace. 

Those servants who wish to make a contract with 
their masters, to give money so that they can be 
free, their masters should accept that of them if they 
know they have the ability to fulfil and are upright 
in religion. It is necessary upon them to give them 
from the wealth Allah has granted them, by dis¬ 
counting them a portion of what they agreed to pay. 

And do not force your slave girls to fornicate, in 
pursuit of wealth, as Abdullah ibn Ubayy did with 
his two slave girls when they requested chastity and 
staying far from fornication, to seek what she earns 
through her private parts. Whoever forces them to 
do that, Allah is Forgiving of their sins after their 
being forced and Merciful to them, because they 
are being forced, and the sin is upon the one who 
forces them. 

I revealed to you, O people, clear verses in which there is no confusion. And I revealed to you examples of the believ¬ 
ers and disbelievers who passed before you, and I revealed to you an admonition through which those who fear their Lord 
by carrying out His commands and refraining from His prohibitions are admonished. 

(jP Allah is the Light of the heavens and the earth, and the Guide of all those in them. The example of His light in the heart 
of a believer is like a closed niche which contains a lantern. The lantern is in a bright glass, as though it is a shining star 
like a pearl. The lantern is lit by the oil of a blessed tree, which is the olive tree. Nothing conceals the tree from the sun, 
neither in the morning nor in the evening. The oil is about to glow, due to its purity, even though a fire has not touched it; 
imagine how it will be when it touches it? The light of the lantern is on the light of the glass. Likewise is the heart of the 
believer when the light of guidance shines in it. Allah enables whomever He wishes amongst His servants to follow the 
Qur’an. And Allah makes things clear through their likenesses, by giving examples. And Allah is Knowing of everything, 
nothing being hidden from Him. 

This lantern is lit in the mosques which Allah has ordered be kept clean from impurities and dirt, to be elevated, and 
to have His name remembered therein through the call to prayer, remembrance and prayer. There pray in them, seeking 
the pleasure of Allah, at the beginning and end of the day. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Celibacy is to be limited, by helping the unmarried to be relieved of it, so that it does not become a means of indecency 
spreading. 

2. A person unable to marry due to his poverty is ordered to stay far away from indecency. 

3. Relief from slavery can be through making a contract to pay for one’s freedom and the slave should be supported with 
wealth in order to become free, so that he does not form part of the lowly class which uses indecency to make a living. 

4. The trade of people’s honour by making prostitution a way to earn money is to be combatted. 

5. The heart of a believer is enlightened with the light of nature and the light of divine guidance. 

6. Mosques are the houses of Allah on earth, which have been established for Him to be worshipped in, so it is necessary 
to keep them far from physical and immaterial dirt. 
















cf' <J \*>L 

I 4iA^ ^ 'k^3 ^ 




| {^} <jAJ&jji 

jo i^\S) 

lO^t^ J°-kU£:4J^ J^>j^ 

** ^ *»9*r * 99 

*4&£)Z&*^QZ& 4 ?*^L 

iijj 


jd Jo 


@ Men whom buying and selling does not distract 
from the remembrance of Allah, performing prayer 
with perfection and giving Zakat, where required. 
They fear the Day of Judgment: that day on which 
the hearts will fluctuate between hope in salvation 
from and fear of the punishment, and the eyes will 
wander in every direction in anxiety. 

(Sj| They do that so that Allah may reward them 
upon the best of their actions and increase their re¬ 
ward through His grace. And Allah provides with¬ 
out account for whomsoever He wishes, according 
to their deeds; rather, He grants them in multitudes 
over the value of their deeds. 

p There is no reward for the deeds of those who 
disbelieve in Allah; it is like a mirage that a thirsty 
person sees on a low-lying piece of land and as¬ 
sumes it to be water. He walks towards it, until 
when he reaches it, does not find any water. Like¬ 
wise is a disbeliever: he thinks his deeds shall bene¬ 
fit him, until he dies and is resurrected, but does not 
find their reward. Rather, he finds his Lord in front 
of him who takes him to account fully for his deeds; 
and Allah is swift in taking account. 

Or their deeds are like the many darkness in 
the depth of the ocean, over which is a wave, over 
which is another wave, over which is a cloud cov¬ 
ering the navigating stars. Compounded layers of 
darkness, one above the other; if the one that finds 
himself among such darkness were to remove his 
hand in front of him, he would barely see it. Like¬ 
wise is a disbeliever: the darkness of ignorance, 
doubt, confusion and his heart being sealed up, 
gather up on him. Whoever Allah does not grant 
guidance from error to and knowledge of the Book, will never find any other guidance or any other book from which he 
can seek enlightenment. 

O Messenger! Do you not know that all the inhabitants of the heavens and earth from the creation of Allah, glorify 
Him? The birds that fly in formation also glorify Him. Of all those creations, Allah knows of the prayer of every one who 
prays, i.e. the human; and the glorification of every one that glorifies Him, i.e. the birds. Allah is all-aware of what they 
do, no action of theirs is hidden from Him. 

@ To Allah alone belongs supreme authority over the heavens and earth, and to Him alone will everyone return for 
accountability and requital. 

(|§p O Messenger! Do you not know that Allah drives the clouds, then joins parts of them together, then makes them into 
layers, one above the other. You then see the rain coming out from the cloud, and falling from the sky from parts of cloud 
like mountains, falling as hail. That hail reaches whoever Allah wills from His servants, and He turns it away from whom¬ 
soever He wills. It is extremely possible that the light from bolts of lightning blinds the eyesight. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. It is incumbent that a believer strikes a balance between worldly occupations and affairs concerning the Hearafter. 

2. The deeds of a disbeliever will become void due to lacking the requisite of faith. 

3. The disbeliever is one who is glaringly disobedient from all the other creations of Allah, who are generally obedient 
and glorify Him. 

4. All stages of rainfall are part of the creation and decree of Allah. 


(^) _jJ> 

j. 3 \ ( ffi) 

\j Jo \ JiLjJ (jr° 


an-Nur 

















4 L. 


JoO 


g. ijj^ x& (£) c>\ j 

JjWL^ $(] n ) ^tr^. O^ ^ 

5 ci^P vs^l^a^gCj 

^^4 y^oj ^ (^) o^?3^ ^ <i^l^ W? 
o^\j*~p\yA3^ ^ L^y* *-&**& tjh (&} cyc^'x^ az^ IW> U I 

t*S^(£) \>dUij\ Jtf J^j^jj ^ cJi-^rO^ I 


O' >4^. 


r 4. £ 


@ Allah alternates between the length of the day 
and night. Indeed, in that alternation is a lesson in 
the power of Allah and His oneness, for those who 
have foresight. 

jjj) And Allah has created everything that walks on 
the face of the earth from a drop of sperm. Some 
walk crawling on their bellies, i.e. snakes, while 
some walk on two feet, i.e. humans and birds, 
while others walk on four legs, i.e. livestock. Allah 
creates whatever He wishes, including things men¬ 
tioned and unmentioned. Indeed, He is capable of 
everything; Nothing is outside His ability. 

@ Verily, I revealed clear verses unto Muhammad 
peace be upon him, wherein there is no ambigui¬ 
ty. Allah guides whoever He wishes to the straight 
path in which there is no deviance, which in turn 
leads him to paradise. 

@ And the hypocrites say, “We have believed in 
Allah and the Messenger, and obeyed Allah and His 
Messenger”, then a group from among them turns 
away. So after claiming to have faith in Allah and 
His Messenger and obeying them, in reality they do 
not obey Allah and His Messenger in fulfilling the 
command to jihad in Allah’s way, and the like. In 
truth, those who turn away from the obedience of 
Allah and His Messenger are not believers, despite 
claiming to be. 

@ And if these hypocrites are called to Allah and 
the Messenger so that the Messenger can pass 
Judgement between them in matters they dispute 
among themselves, they will reject his Judgement 
due to their hypocrisy. 

@ Yet if they know the truth to be in their favour, 
and that he will judge in their favour, they will come to him submissive and humble. 

{J} Is there a chronic illness in the hearts of these people, or is it that they are in doubt as to whether he is the Messenger of 
Allah? Or is it that they fear Allah or His Messenger will wrong them in Judgement? No, it is none of the aforementioned, 
rather, it is because of a defect within their souls due to their turning away from his Judgement, and their opposition to 
him. 

After the stance of the hypocrites who rejected the Judgement of Allah and His Messenger was mentioned, the stance of 
the believers who are content with it was mentioned also. Allah said. 

{J} When the believers are called towards Allah and His Messenger for him to judge between them, their only reaction 
is that they say, “We have heard his statement and obeyed his order”. Those who possess this characteristic are the ones 
who are successful in the world and the Hearafter. 

@ And whoever obeys Allah and obeys His Messenger, fears the outcome of sins, and prevents the punishment of Allah 
upon themselves by fulfilling His commands and refraining from His prohibitions, only they are the ones who achieve 
the success of both the world and the Hearafter. 

@ The hypocrites take the strongest and far-fetched of oaths possible upon Allah, saying that if you were to command 
them to march out to jihad, they would indeed do so. O Messenger! Say to them: “Do not take oaths, for your lying is 
well known, as is your claimed submission. Allah is well-aware of your actions; no action of yours is hidden from Him, 
regardless of how you try to hide them. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The diversity in the creation of Allah is evidence of His power. 2. From among the traits of the hypocrites is their turn¬ 
ing away from the Judgement of Allah, except if it is in their favour. Doubting, spiritual illness and thinking ill of Allah 
are also some of their traits. 3. Submitting to the Judgement of Allah is one of the qualities of the believers, even though 
it may not be in their favour. 4. Obedience to Allah and His Messenger, together with fearing Allah are both the means to 
achieving success in both the worlds. 5. Taking false oaths is common behaviour among the hypocrites. 






h£- 




> I ^ A 














] jjjl 


> 

O 










i$?ij\ <£ ^ 1 ^- 4 ^ ^> 4 ^ 0^===^4^J o£ 

l§~^J jJo / >4^ X^J 4-4 

i i4*^ ^4x 4 \ Q^\s ^ 

> j^Jj] 

i 3jX^4^0£s?dl4 <-^5 
o^^cJis 4x4 \ x4 o<i ^ 



(j| O Messenger! Say to these hypocrites: “Obey 
Allah and His Messenger both physically and 
spiritually. If you turn away from their obedience 
as you have been commanded, then his responsi¬ 
bility is only to convey the message as he has been 
tasked, whereas the responsibility you have been 
tasked with is to obey and implement whatever he 
has brought. If you obey him in whatever he com¬ 
mands you to do and refrain from whatever he pre¬ 
vents you from, you shall be guided to the truth. 
The Messenger’s responsibility is only to convey 
the message clearly, not to carry you onto guidance 
or force you upon it.” 

@ Allah has promised those of you who believe 
in Him and perform good deeds, that He will help 
them against their enemies and make them rulers 
on earth. Just like He made the believers before 
them rulers on earth and promised them that He 
would make the religion of Islam He preferred for 
them established and dominant; He also promised 
that He will change their circumstances of fear into 
peace, as long as they worshipped Him alone and 
did not ascribe partners to Him. Whoever shows in¬ 
gratitude after all those blessings are the very ones 
who leave the obedience of Allah. 

@ And perform prayer to perfection, give Zakat on 
your wealth and obey the Messenger in whatever he 
commands you with, together with leaving whatev¬ 
er he prevents you from, in the hope that you shall 
be safe from your fears and be successful in your 
objectives. 

(jjS> O Messenger! Do not ever think that those who 
disbelieve in Allah will slip away from Him when 
He intends to punish them. Their abode on the Day of Judgment is hell; what an evil abode hell is! 

When Allah previously mentioned the rulings of seeking permission for the mature, free people, here He mentions the 
rulings of seeking permission for servants, those who are free but have not yet reached maturity, and children when they 
do reach maturity. He says: 

@) O those who have faith in Allah and act upon the laws set for them! Your free immature children, male servants and 
female servants should seek permission from you thrice, at three times: before the morning prayer at the time of changing 
from nightwear into daily clothes, in the afternoon when changing clothes for the siesta and after the night prayer because 
it is the time when you remove your daywear and change into your nightwear. These are three times of privacy for you; 
they should not enter your rooms except after taking permission from you. Apart from these times, there is no harm in 
them entering your rooms nor you entering theirs, because you frequently have to move around one another and so it 
would be an inconvenience to prevent them from entering except with permission. Just as Allah has made the rulings of 
seeking permission clear to you, He also makes clear the verses that show the rulings He has laid down for you. Allah is 
ever-aware of the requirements of His servants; wise in whatever laws He passes for them. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Following the Messenger peace be upon him is a sign of being upon guidance. 

2. Conveying the message is the responsibility of the Messenger, whilst guidance is from Allah alone. 

3. It is necessary for the caller to Allah to expend efforts in calling to Him, but the results are in Allah’s hands. 

4. Faith and good deeds are means to attaining authority on earth and peace. 

5. Establishing prayer, giving Zakat and obedience to the Messenger: are means to acquiring mercy. 

6. The servants and children should be disciplined in seeking permission at times where people’s privacy is compromised. 

7. Difficulty in matters should bring ease in rulings. 





an-Nur 




















cyt-X^M ^ j^LZj\ 

($> 

<5^5 ol fX^rly40^S^ et^ 

^*1$ 

&J?_3\]^==^kl^ o^4}\ 


(Sj| When your children reach the age of puberty 
they should seek permission at all times before en¬ 
tering into your homes, as has been mentioned re¬ 
garding the adults previously. Just as Allah makes 
clear the rulings of seeking permission for you, 

He also makes His verses clear. And Allah is ev- 
er-aware of the requirements of His servants; wise 
in whatever laws He passes for them. 

(j|) And the elderly women that no longer experi¬ 
ence menstruation, or can no longer give birth, nor 
have any desire to marry again, there is no sin upon 
them if they do not wear some of their outer gar¬ 
ments i.e. overcloak and veil, as long as they do not 
expose the beauty they have been commanded to 
conceal. However, for them to wear those garments 
is better for them than to discard them, enhancing 
veiling and chastity. Allah is all-hearing of your 
statements; none of them are hidden from Him and 
He shall requit you for them. 

(Jj§j) There is no sin upon the blind who has lost his 
eyesight, nor upon the lame nor the sick if they 
leave those responsibilities they can no longer ful¬ 
fil, i.e. jihad in the way of Allah. O believers! There 
is no sin upon you in eating from your own homes 
or the homes of sons, nor in eating from the homes 
of your fathers, mothers, brothers, sisters, paternal 
uncles and aunts nor maternal uncles and aunts, nor 
those houses which you have been entrusted with 
safeguarding, i.e. garden-keeper. There is also no 
sin in eating at the house of your friend as is cus¬ 
tomary to please him. It is not a problem whether 
you eat alone or together in groups. So when you do 
enter any houses like the ones mentioned above or 
any others, greet those within them with peace by saying: “Peace be upon you”, and if there is no one inside them, then 
greet yourselves by saying: “Peace be upon us and the pious servants of Allah”. This is a blessed greeting from Allah; 
He has legislated it for you because of the love and affection it spreads among you. It is also a pleasant greeting in that 
it pleases the soul of the one who hears is Just like the aforementioned clarity in this Surah, Allah clearly explains His 
verses in the hope that you will implement whatever they contain. 

<!*} Beneficial Points: 

1. It is permissible for elderly women to not wear some outer garments; any doubts about that are settled. 

2. Taking precaution in religion is a characteristic of the Mindful. 

3. Genuine excuses are means having responsibility lessened. 

4. A Muslim community is one in which there is shared responsibility, cooperation and brotherhood. 
























o<\ 




jgk°u^& 

Ay j2L-Z>\ \ 'A& ^AyAjJ AA >A^y^jl ZfA\ AL\y}j\ 

<• j^yy^Aj j^-^t £y*^<l) A&^y^Zi ^j&x .J 

4y^«-'A {^) X_^jyiJ^ 4jif 

O ^A-OA ^ i 




After Allah mentioned seeking permission before 
entering, He then mentions seeking permission be¬ 
fore leaving, saying, 

© The believers who are true in their faith are 
those who believe in Allah and His Messenger, and 
when they are summoned to convene by the Proph¬ 
et peace be upon him for a matter in relation to the 
affairs of the Muslims, they do not leave until they 
seek his permission to do so. O Messenger! Indeed, 
those who seek your permission before leaving, 
they are the ones who truly believe in Allah and His 
Messenger; so if they seek your permission to leave 
due to some important matter that concerns them, 
grant permission to whomsoever you wish from 
them and ask Allah to forgive their sins. Indeed, Al¬ 
lah Forgiving of the sins of whoever repents from 
His servants, and is merciful to them. 

© O believers! Honour the Messenger of Allah; 
when you call out to him, do not call him by name, 
e.g. “O Muhammad!”, or the name of his father, e.g. 
“O the son of Abdullah!”, like you call one another. 
Rather, say: “O Messenger of Allah, O Prophet of 
Allah!” And when he summons you for a general 
matter, do not treat his summoning like that of each 
other in petty issues; rather, hasten to answering his 
summon. Verily, Allah knows of those of you who 
leave covertly without seeking permission, so those 
who go against the command of the Messenger of 
Allah peace be upon him should fear that Allah can 
afflict them with trials and afflictions, or with a 
painful punishment they cannot bear. 

© Know well that to Allah belongs everything in 
the heavens and on earth: in terms of being His cre¬ 
ation, under His supreme authority and His control. O people! He knows whatever conditions you are in; nothing is 
hidden from Him, and on the Day of Judgment when you return to Him after resurrection, He will inform you of all the 
deeds you did in the world. Allah knows everything, nothing in the heavens or the earth is hidden from Him. 


< (Tit rHS tt £ \ <' \ 

^y^ j±siA\ as \ 

is. 


ISfL 






The Criterion (Surah Al-Furqan) 


® Themes of the Surah: 

A focus is made on coming to the aid of the Messenger peace be upon him after the idolaters’ prolonged attack against 
him. 

® Explanation: 

© Blessed is Allah who revealed the Qur’an as a standard distinguishing between truth and falsehood, onto His servant 
and Messenger Muhammad peace be upon him, so that he could be a Messenger towards the humans and the jinn, and a 
warner to them of the punishment of Allah. 

© The One to Whom alone belongs authority over the heavens and earth, Who did not beget a child, nor has any partner 
in His authority, Who created everything appropriately and foresaw its creation according to His knowledge and wisdom 
to perfection. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The religion of Islam is one of order and etiquettes. 

2. There is blessing and goodness in holding fast to etiquettes. 

3. The status of the Messenger of Allah peace be upon him demands reverence and respect, more than that of anyone else. 

4. Misfortune is in contradicting the way of the Prophet peace be upon him. 

5. The authority of Allah and His knowledge encompass everything. 


































\5y° 

"3fi£ o\^^jj\sjo^i3t>^j 

LaLls>_^«i£>--Xjl3 Oj^>-lt ^.-3 ^3 _?AjV_pb <^\ s >\ I 

\j> \ij Q]3j_jj 


© Instead of Allah, the idolaters adopted deities 
who cannot create anything small or large, but are 
themselves created. Verily, Allah created them from 
non-existence; they are unable to fend off any harm 
from themselves nor bring themselves any benefit, 
nor are they able to cause death to any living or give 
life to any dead, or raise the dead from their graves. 

And after Allah reminded them of their ascribing 
partners to Allah, He reminded them of their stance 
on His Book and Messenger, saying; 

© And those who disbelieved in Allah and His 
Messenger said: “This Qur’an is nothing but a lie 
which Muhammad has fabricated and blasphe¬ 
mously attributed to Allah. Other people have also 
helped him in its fabrication”. These disbelievers 
themselves have made a false statement, because 
the Qur’an is the speech of Allah; it is impossible 
for humans and jinn to come up anything like it. 

© And these rejecters of the Qur’an said, “The 
Qur’an is vain tales of the previous people which 
they used to record; Muhammad has copied them. 

They are recited to him throughout the day”. 

© O Messenger! Say to these rejecters: The Qur’an 
was revealed by Allah, Who knows of everything 
in the heavens and earth. It is not made up as you 
think it to be. Indeed, Allah Forgiving of those of 
His servants who repent, and is merciful to them. 

© The idolaters who rejected the Prophet peace 
be upon him said, “What is wrong with this man 
that claims he is a messenger from Allah when he 
eats food just as other people do, and walks around 
the markets in search of livelihood? Why did Allah 
not send an angel with him who would accompany 
him, proclaim his truthfulness and help him?” 

© “Or send down a treasure for him from the heavens, or that he has a garden from which he eats fruits, so that he does 
not need to walk around the markets in search of livelihood?” The oppressors also said, “O believers! You are not follow¬ 
ing any messenger; you are only following a man whose intellect has been overwhelmed by magic.” 

© O Messenger! You should see and be amazed at how they can describe you with such false attributes, i.e. they said, 
“He is a magician”, “He has been spellbound”, and “He is insane”, so they deviated from the truth because of that. They 
are incapable of treading the path towards guidance and of questioning your truthfulness and honesty. 

© Blessed is Allah Who can, if He wishes, give you the good they think up for you like the gardens under the trees of 
which streams flow and the fruits of which you can eat; and can also grant you palaces in which you can live in luxury. 
© The statements that came from them were not said in search of the truth or evidence, rather, in conclusion, they have 
rejected the Day of Judgment. And for whoever rejects the Day of Judgment, I have prepared a blazing fire. 

Beneficial Points: 

1. The true deity is One Who has the ability to create, benefit, give life, and cause death; the idols are incapable of doing 
all those things. 

2. The disbelievers turn away from the truth relying on baseless doubts. 

3. Affirmation of the qualities of forgiving and mercy for Allah. 

4. Messengership does not necessitate negation of humanity from the Messenger. 

5. The humility of the Prophet peace be upon him in that he lived as normal people live. 


lA^====j5^a-4 ^3 

St 




















- fl Q ^ . .0 C>^0 'ul 

j\ jUJ J 

^^^ilSU\4^0]^Ji\S^ 
l^j^L^r^ik? ($) VXBj^iX5^ o^= 

>Xts. Jji3 «0i^ 0jS ae^Xi-Xjo 
il)^La ~^£Jc2^LSi UJ ^ (w^,_C-»>-^\|AX? zJjla> 
j&SjC~a !^?\j eL4j\ Ot-^ZJ^ 


23 


ZJ 


lL?^* • 3 jJ^a>»£-3 l^ar. 


\f'" \ 

*Ot9ln*>?J I 




c>5 cUy^lxLI^j 


© When the disbelievers will look at the hellfire 
from a distance, they will hear an unsettling, severe 
boiling sound emitting from it due to its anger upon 
them. 

© And when these disbelievers will be thrown into 
hell from a tight place, with their hands chained to 
their necks, they will call destruction upon them¬ 
selves hoping to escape from hell. 

© O disbelievers! Do not call upon one type of 
destruction for yourselves today; call upon many 
types! It will make no difference; you will not be 
granted what you seek. Instead, you will remain in 
painful punishment forever. 

© O Messenger! Say to them: “Is the aforemen¬ 
tioned punishment described for you better, or the 
everlasting paradise with its eternal blessings that 
never finish? It is the very same one that Allah has 
promised His Allah-conscious servants as a reward 
and abode they will return to on the Day of Judg¬ 
ment.” 

© In this paradise, they will have whatever bless¬ 
ings they desire; that is a promise on Allah which 
His Allah-conscious servants will ask Him for. And 
the promise of Allah will be fulfilled, because He 
never breaks promises. 

© On the day when the rejecting idolaters will be 
gathered, together with whatever they worshipped 
instead of Allah, He will say to those worshipped, 
scolding those who worshipped them, “Did you 
lead My servants astray by commanding them to 
worship you, or did they go astray of their own ac¬ 
cord?” 

© The worshipped ones will say, “Our Lord! You 


Al-Furqan 

are exalted from having any partner. It was not for us to take any guardians instead of You, so how could we call Your 
servants to worship us instead of You? Our Lord! Rather, You granted these idolaters and their forefathers enjoyment 
through the pleasures of the world, gradually leading them into their destruction, until they forgot Your remembrance and 
worshipped others with You. They were people doomed due to their wretchedness.” 

© O idolaters! Verily, those you worshipped other than Allah have belied you in your claims against them, so you cannot 
fend off the punishment from yourselves nor help them due to your incapability. O believers! Whoever oppresses from 
amongst you by ascribing partners to Allah, I shall make him suffer a great punishment, just like I will make the ones 
mentioned suffer. 

When the idolaters disapproved of the Messenger peace be upon him eating food and walking in the markets, Allah 
refuted them by saying, 

© O Messenger! All the messengers I sent before you were humans who would eat food and walk in the markets; you 
are not a unique messenger in that sense. O people! I have made you tests for each other by granting you varying degrees 
of affluence, poverty, health and sickness; throughout these different circumstances, will you bear whatever I afflict you 
with so that I may reward you upon your patience? Your Lord is ever-aware of those who bear patience and those who do 
not, and those who obey Him and those who disobey Him. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The blend of inciting fear of the punishment of Allah, together with awakening a longing for His reward. 

2. Those worshipped will proclaim innocence from those that worshipped them on the Day of Judgment. 

3. Pleasures of the world make one forget the remembrance of Allah. 

4. The Messengers being humans is a blessing of Allah for the people, because it is easier to relate to them. 

5. People being in varying levels of blessings and trials is a test from Allah for His servants. 

















| jls 


frvrl 



0£~^ j\|5 *”' 

0 ]^^| 







, & 


@ The disbelievers who do not expect to meet Me 
and who do not fear My punishment said, “Why 
does not Allah send down the angels to us, so they 
can tell us about the truth of Muhammad?’ or ‘Why 
can we not see our Lord with our own eyes, so He 
can tell us about that?’ They are too proud within 
themselves and this prevented them from having 
faith, and they have gone beyond the limit of dis¬ 
belief and transgression by this statement of theirs. 

(jp On the Day when these people will see the an¬ 
gels at the time of their death, in the Transitory 
Stage, when they are resurrected, when they are 
driven to give account and when they are entered 
into the Fire, there will be no good news for them 
on those occasions, unlike the believers, and the an¬ 
gels will say to them, “Unlawful and forbidden for 
you is the good news from Allah.” 

(jp I shall turn to the good deeds the disbelievers 
did in the world and due to their invalidity and lack 
of benefit because of their disbelief, I will scatter 
them like the particles of dust a person sees in the 
window. 

(j§P The believers, the people of Paradise, on that 
day will have a better position and place of rest and 
sleep than these disbelievers. That is because of 
their faith in Allah and their righteous deeds. 
j§j) Mention - O Messenger - the day when the sky 
will split apart to reveal thin white clouds, and the 
angels will be sent down to the plains of the gather¬ 
ing in abundance due to their large number, 
jj!) Kingdom, which is the true and established 
kingdom, on the Day of Judgment will be for the 
Merciful, may He be glorified. That day will be dif- A1 ~ Furqan 

ficult for the disbelievers as opposed to the believers for whom it will be easy. 

(jp Mention - O Messenger - the day the evildoer on account of leaving out following the Messenger (peace be upon him) 
will bite his own hand out of regret and say, ‘If only I had followed the Messenger and what he brought from his Lord, 
and I had taken a path with him to salvation.’ 

(jp He will also say due to extreme grief cursing himself: Alas for me! If only I had not taken so-and-so disbeliever as a 
friend! 

(jp This disbelieving friend led me away from the Qur’an after it reached me through the Messenger. Satan has always 
been one who betrays man often. When some difficulty comes on him, he renounces him. 

(jp The Messenger will say on that day complaining about the condition of his people: O my Lord! My people, to whom 
You sent me, left this Qur’an and ignored it. 

(S|p Similar to the harm and preventing others from your path that you - O Messenger - encountered from your people, 
I had assigned to every Prophet before you an enemy from among the evildoers of his people. Your Lord is a sufficient 
guide, who guides to the truth, and He is a sufficient helper, who will help you against your enemy. 

(S§p Those who disbelieved in Allah said, ‘Why was the Qur’an not sent down to him all at once instead of in bits and 
pieces?’ I sent the Qur’an bit by bit to strengthen your heart - O Messenger - by its revelation time after time. I revealed 
it bit by bit to you to make it easy for you to understand and memorise it. 

^ Beneficial Points: 

1. Arrogance is a barrier from guidance to the truth. 2. Disbelief prevents the acceptance of righteous deeds. 3. Disbelief 
will be the cause of great regret on the Day of Judgement. 4. The danger of evil friends. 5. The harm of abandoning 
the Qur’an. 6. The enmity of the people of falsehood for the people of truth is ongoing. 7. One of the wisdoms behind 
revealing the Qur’an gradually is to reassure the Prophet (peace be upon him) and to facilitate his understanding, mem¬ 
orisation and practice. 8. Refutation of the doubts raised by the disbelievers with regard to the gradual revelation of the 
Qur’an. 






b&. 

IX) J 




0 


362 



















'S>* ^ IS*J* \iJpV* -iSlj 

|l^i\lSl^($)Ij3j^jJ^ S&3 jL^O^ 
0 r/L-^^SilS ^ ^Ui 

j \ 5y>0j \ ;s\cj ($) t*Jj O 


£ 

Al)!fr I 



@ The idolaters do not bring to you - O Messenger 
- any point that they propose except that I bring to 
you the true and firm response to it and I bring to 
you something that is better explained. 

@ Those who will be driven on the Day of Judg¬ 
ment being dragged on their faces to Hell. Such 
people are in the worst place because their place 
will be Hell and they are on the worst path because 
their path is the path of disbelief and deviation. 
{§} I gave Moses the Torah and appointed his broth¬ 
er, Aaron, as a Messenger to help him. 

@ So I said to them: Go, both of you, to Pharaoh 
and his people who denied My signs. So they ful¬ 
filled our instruction and went to them and invited 
them to Allah’s Oneness, but they denied them and 
I then destroyed them completely on account of 
their denial. 

@ The people of Noah, too: when they rejected 
the Messengers by rejecting Noah (peace be upon 
him), I destroyed them by drowning them in the 
ocean, and I made their destruction a sign of My 
Power to eliminate the wrongdoers. I have prepared 
a painful punishment on the Day of Judgment for 
the wrongdoers. 

I also destroyed the Ad, the people of Hud, and 
the Thamud, the people of Salih. I destroyed the 
people of the Well and I destroyed many commu¬ 
nities between these three. 

@ To each of these who were destroyed I had de¬ 
scribed the destruction of the previous communities 
and the reasons for it so that they take heed, and 
each of them I completely destroyed because of 
their disbelief and stubbornness. 

(J) These rejecters from your people in their travel to the Levant have come by the town of people of Lot on which stones 
had rained down as a punishment for their immoral behaviour so that they make take heed. Were they blind to this town 
and did they not see it? No! Instead they do not expect to be raised from the dead and taken to account thereafter. 

@ Whenever these rejecters meet you - O Messenger - they ridicule you by saying mockingly and in denial: Is this the 
one Allah has sent as a Messenger to us? 

@ He almost led us astray from the worship of our Allahs. If we had not stood so firmly by their worship, he would have 
turned us away from it by his arguments and proofs. They will soon come to know, when they see the punishment in their 
graves and on the Day of Judgement, who is furthest from the path - is it them or he - and they will come to know which 
of them is astray. 

@ Have you seen - O Messenger - the person who made his desire a Allah and followed it! Will you be a guardian over 
him to bring him back to faith and prevent him from disbelief? 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Rejection of Allah and denial of His signs is a cause for communities to be destroyed. 

2. The lack of faith in resurrection is the cause for not taking heed. 

3. Mocking the people of truth is the trait of the disbelievers. 

4. The danger of following one’s desires. 


\ _ _ $ _ _ ^ ^ _ y ^ 0 2 „ 

j So 3 Acyif ^^ 0 ^ 

I dJ' 4 


















X^ <-j£^O _“) lIIv^ ^ ^ ( £) jL»b ^^ ^ j 

_y^ \ p^U l^ii^yx)' 



s ,/. -T^ 

j\XX<X_j\XX* o Joo<dAj 





I \ Alto (Jt^^tJ \ ) > ^. <: -=== J ^ ^L^>7^-Aj 


U*L> 


(S§p Rather, do you - O Messenger - think that most 
of those whom you call towards Allah’s Oneness 
and obedience, hear with acceptance or understand 
the arguments and proofs? They are just like cattle 
in terms of their hearing, comprehension and un¬ 
derstanding. Rather, they are further from the path 
than cattle are. 

(SjP Have you - O Messenger - not seen how your 
Lord extends the shade on the surface of the earth. 

If He had willed to make it stand still without mov¬ 
ing He could have done so. Then I made the sun an 
indicator for it, becoming long and short in accord¬ 
ance to it. 

{§} Then I retracted the shade by reducing it grad¬ 
ually little by little in accordance to the height of 
the sun. 

@ It is Allah who has made the night like a gar¬ 
ment to cover you and cover all things. It is He who 
made sleep a rest that you could enjoy from your 
occupation. It is He who made the day a time when 
you go out to your work. 

(Sj) It is He who sent the winds as heralds of good 
news of the fall of rain which is His Mercy to His 
servants. I sent down from the sky rain water that is 
pure which they use to purify themselves. 

(S|P So that I can revive by means of the water that 
comes down a barren land that has no vegetation by 
causing various types of plants to grow and spread¬ 
ing greenery on it, and to give that water as a drink 
to the many animals and people I have created. 

(jp I have explained in various ways in the Qur’an, 
the arguments and proofs so that they might take 
heed, but most people persist in their rejection and 
denial of the truth. 

@ If it had been My will, I would have sent a Messenger to every town, to warn them of Allah’s punishment. But I did 
not will that. I only sent Muhammad (peace be upon him) as a Messenger to all people. 

(SJ) So do not follow the disbelievers in their demands for you to be soft with them and in the proposals that they put 
forward. Strive against them with this Qur’an that is revealed to you a mighty struggle by being patient over their harm 
and tolerating difficulties in calling them to Allah. 

(jp It is Allah, may He be glorified, who merged the water of the two bodies of flowing water. He mixed the sweet and 
the salty, and put a barrier and dividing line between them that prevents them from intermingling. 

(jp It is He who created human beings from the semen of men and women. By creating human beings He established 
the relationship of kinship by blood and relationship by marriage. Your Lord is all powerful and Nothing is outside His 
ability. It is through His Power that He created man from the semen of a man and woman. 

(jp Yet instead of Allah, the disbelievers worship idols that can neither benefit them, if they follow them, nor harm them, 
if they go against them. The disbeliever has always followed Satan in that which angers Allah, may He be glorified. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The disbeliever stoops to a level lower than that of the animals on account of his rejection of Allah. 

2. The phenomenon of shade is one of the signs of Allah that indicate His Power. 

3. The creation of the night for rest and the day for work is a blessing of Allah. 

4. Rain is a form of Allah’s mercy for His creation. 

5. Diversification of arguments and proofs is an effective educational style. 

6. Calling by means of the Qur’an is one of the forms of striving in Allah’s path. 


^ xV->" '—' ^__ "jJ j ^ 




Ooj 




Al-Furqan 


















fC^e^===^±^J\ \jA ^ Laj 

J^yj {^) j lyr^ <£^5 

(^Jl^===^j ^‘b -Xa->cj ^o>—(Jp 

<2-6 A^^JOo 

0~^) \ <j5JL-*5 \ ^P 



^l3j ^1^-14^-^'^ Wj 

^!| 

j ($) ^bb^^o' 

UiLll ^ \S 

ol^l^jS o 2U^ Gj oj^ 

T ($) o^\^i<$)&> j 

^j| ($)\iV^ <5^3 0^12=^^ l^r\--S^^5 l^r-^4^ V^S-Ji^ 


jgD I sent you - O Messenger - only to give good 
news to those who follow Allah, by having faith 
and doing righteous actions, and to warn those who 
go against Him, by committing disbelief and sin. 
@ Say, O Messenger: I am not asking for any re¬ 
ward for conveying the message. But anyone of you 
who wishes to take a path towards Allah’s pleasure 
by spending, then let him do so. 

@ Put your trust - O Messenger - in all of your af¬ 
fairs in Allah, the Living and Everlasting who nev¬ 
er dies, declare His purity and celebrate His praise, 
may He be glorified. He knows the sins of His serv¬ 
ants well enough. Nothing of that is hidden from 
Him and He will recompense them for the same. 
@ The One who created the heavens and earth and 
what is between them in six days, and then estab¬ 
lished Himself on the throne, in a meaning that is 
befitting for His Majesty. He is the Merciful, so ask 
then - O Messenger - about Him, One who is aware, 
and that is Allah - the One who knows everything 
and from Whom nothing is hidden. 

When it is said to the disbelievers: Prostrate to 
the Merciful, they say: We will not prostrate to the 
Merciful. What is the Merciful? We do not know or 
acknowledge Him. Should we prostrate to what you 
tell us when we do not know Him?! His instruction 
to them to prostrate to Him only puts them further 
away from having faith in Allah. 

@ Blessed is He Who made stations in the heavens 
for the planets and the moving stars, Who made in 
the sky a sun that radiates light, and Who made a 
moon that illuminates the earth with the light of the 
sun that it reflects. 

(jp It is Allah who made the night and day follow and replace each other, for anyone who wishes to take a lesson from 
Allah’s signs and come onto the right path, or wishes to be grateful to Allah for His favours. 

After Allah mentioned in this Surah the disbelievers who turn away from having faith in Allah and following Him, He 
mentioned the attributes of His righteous servants who are devoted to following Him and He said: 

@ The servants of the Merciful are the believers who walk humbly on the earth with dignity, and when the foolish ad¬ 
dress them they do not retaliate in the same manner but they tell them something that saves them from their evil. 

(S§Jj) Those who spend the night prostrating on their foreheads and standing on their feet, praying to Allah. 

@ Those who say in their prayer to their Lord: Our Lord, remove from us the punishment of Hell, for the punishment of 
Hell is perpetual and everlasting for those who die as disbelievers. 

J) It is a terrible place of settlement for anyone, and a terrible place of residence for anyone. 

{§p They are those whom when they spend their wealth do not go to the limit of extravagance in their spending, nor do 
they restrict their spending to only those whom they have to spend on such as themselves and others, but their spending 
is balanced between wastefulness and niggardliness. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The person who calls to Allah does not seek a reward from people. 

2. Allah transcends His creation. 

3. The Merciful (Al-Rahman) is one of the names of Allah that no one has ever shared with Him. It indicates to one of 
His attributes which is the attribute of Mercy. 

4. The servant is assisted by the night and day coming one after the other to make up any act of obedience missed in any 
one of them. 

5. Some of the attributes of the servants of the Merciful is their humility and tolerance, their obedience to Allah when 
people are neglectful, their fear of Allah and their adherence to moderation in spending and in other matters. 


















^ij^i JoL-A£ O^J <J>^\jSf 

j^J^rj iJ (^) V^V_i3\ (3^-5 

1 CJG(j^\ 0\Sl^i 
61^5 %£J^^\k^ 

^%i?j4==>i ^^Ji30lij^l^jiSiL 



s^31^43 lyt&^ j 


(jp Those who do not call on any other deity be¬ 
sides Allah, may He be glorified, nor kill any per¬ 
son, whose killing Allah has prohibited except for 
that which Allah has allowed such as the killing of a 
murderer, renegade or a married adulterer, nor com¬ 
mit adultery. Whoever does these major sins will 
face the punishment for the sin he has committed 
on the Day of Judgement. 

@ The punishment will be doubled for him on the 
Day of Judgement, and he will remain in the pun¬ 
ishment, disgraced and humiliated. 

@ But those who repent to Allah and do good 
deeds that indicate the sincerity of their repentance, 
then Allah will change the evil deeds of such peo¬ 
ple into good ones. Allah is Forgiving of the sins of 
those of His servants who repent and He is Merciful 
towards them. 

(Sjp Those who repent to Allah and prove the sin¬ 
cerity of their repentance by doing good deeds and 
giving up sins, their repentance is one that is ac¬ 
cepted. 

@ Those who do not attend falsehood, such as 
places of sins and prohibited amusement, and when 
they pass by futile statements and actions they 
pass by quickly, keeping the dignity of their souls 
by staying away from becoming involved in these 
things. 

@ Those who, when reminded of Allah’s signs that 
are heard and seen, do not turn a deaf ear to the 
signs that are heard and do not turn a blind eye to 
the signs that are seen. 

(jp Those who say in their prayer to their Lord: Our 
Lord, give us from our spouses and offspring those 
who will be the coolness of our eyes due to their piety and steadfastness on the truth. Make us leaders in truth who are 
emulated by those who are mindful of You. 

(Sj) Those who possess those attributes will be rewarded with lofty chambers in the highest stage of Paradise for their 
steadfastness in following Allah. There they will be met by the angels with greetings and peace and they will be safe there 
from all difficulties. 

There they will stay forever - a beautiful place of settlement for them to settle in and a place of residence for them to 
reside in. 

(jjj) Say - O Messenger, to the disbelievers who persist in their disbelief: My Lord will never care about you because of 
some benefit that He gets from your obedience. If it were not because He calls you for your benefit He would not have 
cared about you. Now since you rejected that which the Messengers brought from your Lord, the recompense for such 
rejection will be inseparable from you. 

Beneficial Points: 

1. Some of the attributes of those who are servants of the Merciful include: Staying away from idolatry, avoiding taking a 
life unjustly, staying away from fornication and falsehood, taking a lesson from Allah’s signs and praying to Him. 

2. Sincere repentance requires the leaving of the sin and the doing of good deeds. 

3. Patience is a means for entering the highest stage in paradise. 

4. Allah is not in need of the disbelievers’ having faith. 






















The Poets (Surah Al-Shifara) 








\( ^) i * 

* Cj^) ^ o^5i 

\y^V*\^j\ ^ \ ^jSjJis a1p^<p^S? [ 

(5i> Kjf ^^ 0 Oji^^S^aj 

6L3 $ cy^yj^j^=y o^t^j <ito 

^a] 1 ilS\ Lj^ fe^V*j\j ^U (^) i-~?) <j\jJ 

) l ] \i ( ^ Ljj^j^ ^1 L^y y^ 0 rryjyi\ ll^ 

s^y c*yy ^ o^.^4<x 

pip3\ jj]S (^) 

y^r^yy j^>\ o^ ($)oi 


® Themes of the Surah: 

It focuses on confronting those who persist in their 
denial of the Messenger and who challenge his 
messengership and on lowering their importance. 

® Explanation: 

0 This surah begins with the disconnected letters, 
the explanation for which has already preceeded in 
Surah Baqarah. 

0 Those are the verses of the Qur’an that makes 
the truth clear from falsehood. 

0 Perhaps you O Messenger because of your ea¬ 
gerness for their guidance are killing yourself out 
of fear for them that they do not believe in Allah. 
<0 If I had wished to send down to them a miracle 
from the sky I would have sent it down and their 
necks would remain bowed in utter humility before 
it. But I did not wish that, in order to test them: Do 
they believe in the Ghaib? 

0 Whenever any new reminder that is revealed by 
the Merciful to these idolaters, which contain His 
arguments that indicate His Oneness and the truth 
of His prophet, they turn away from listening to it 
and accepting it. 

0 They have denied what their Messenger brought 
to them, but the confirmation of the information 
that they used to mock at will soon come to them 
and the punishment will fall upon them. 

0 Do these people remain persistent in their dis¬ 
belief and not look at the earth, how many different 
types of vegetation that is beautiful to look at and 
that has plenty of benefits did I grow therein! 

0 In the earth’s growing various types of vegetation there truly is a clear sign of the Power of the One Who has made it 
grow to bring back the dead to life, though most of them do not have faith. 

0 Your Lord - O Messenger - is the One Who is the Dominant who can never be overpower, and the Merciful to those 
of His servants who have faith. 

0 Remember - O Messenger - when your Lord called out to Moses instructing him to go to the people who were doing 
wrong by their rejection of Allah and enslavement of the people of Moses. 

0 These were the people of Pharaoh. He should instruct them gently and softly to be mindful of Allah by fulfilling His 
instructions and avoiding His prohibitions. 

0 0 Moses (peace be upon him) said, I fear that they will deny me and what I convey to them from you, and that my 
breast will be constricted because of their denial of me, and that my tongue will not be free in calling to Allah, so send 
Gabriel (peace be upon him) to my brother, Aaron, so that he could assist me. 

0 They also have a charge against me because I had killed the Copt, and I fear they may kill me. 0 Allah said to Mo¬ 
ses (peace be upon him): By no means! They will never kill you. Go, you and your brother Aaron, with My signs that 
indicate your truthfulness. I shall be with you with My assistance and support, listening to what you say and what is said 
to you. Nothing of that misses us. 0 Go to Pharaoh and tell him: We are two Messengers sent to you by the Lord of all 
created things. 

0 That you send the Israelites with us. 0 Pharaoh said to Moses (peace be upon him): Did we not bring you up as a 
child among us? Did you not stay with us for many years of your life? So what has now made you claim prophethood? 
0 You committed a serious deed when you killed the Copt in defence of a man of your people, and you are one of those 
who deny my favours to you. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The concern of the Messenger (peace be upon him) for the guidance of people. 2. Affirmation of the attributes of might 
and mercy for Allah. 3. Being gentle with those who are invited to Allah is required and desired. 4. The importance for 
a preacher to be eloquent and open hearted. 5. The calls of the prophets are a liberation from the servitude to other than 
Allah. 6. The disbelievers employ their services to prevent others from Allah’s path. 


\cric^\j3. 




Al-Shuara 


367 





Part 19 






















{^) \ <^>3 

j^> 

jLJ\s®o^K 


k£4 


^ ? 


^LU 

A 


5®D0^td 

V 


@ Moses (peace be upon him) said to Pharaoh: I 
did what you mentioned before I received revela¬ 
tion and was sent as a messenger, 
dj} So I fled from you to Madyan after killing him 
when I feared that you will kill me. Then my Lord 
gave me knowledge and made me one of His Mes¬ 
sengers that He sends to people, 
dj} Your bringing me up without enslaving me after 
you enslaved the Israelites is a favour that you are 
reminding me of?! 

dj} Pharaoh said to Moses (peace be upon him): 

What is the Lord of all created things Whose Mes¬ 
senger you claim to be? 

dj} Moses said in response to Pharaoh: The Lord of 
all created things is the Lord of the heavens and the 
earth and the Lord of whatever is between them. If 
you are certain that He is your Lord then worship 
Him alone. 

dj} Pharaoh said to the leaders of his people around 
him: Do you not hear the response of Moses and the 
false claim it contains. 

dj} Moses said to them: Allah is your Lord and the 
Lord of your earlier forefathers, 
dj} Pharaoh said: This man who claims to be a Mes¬ 
senger to you is insane. He is not aware of how 
to respond and he says that which does not make 
sense. 

dj} Moses said, Allah, the One to Whom I call you, 
is the Lord of the East and the West and the Lord of 
what is in between them. If only you had sense that 
you could reason with. 

dj} Pharaoh said to Moses after becoming unable to 
argue with him: If you worship any Allah other than 
Me, I will throw you into prison. 

dj} Moses (peace be upon him) said to Pharaoh: Will you throw me into prison even if I bring to you something that makes 
clear my truthfulness in what I have brought to you from Allah? 

d§p He said: Bring what you say will indicate your truthfulness if you are true in your claim! 

d§P So Moses threw his stick down on the ground and it suddenly became a snake for everyone to see. 

dj) He put his hand into the opening of his garment without its being white and then he drew it out radiant white - not the 

white of leprosy - for the onlookers to see. 

(§6) Pharaoh said to the leaders of his people around him: This man is a magician, well versed in magic. 

dj} He means to use his magic to drive you out of your land! What do you suggest we do to him? 

dj} dj} They said to him: Delay him and his brother and do not rush to punish them. Send out to the cities of Egypt those 

who will gather the magicians, to bring every magician, well versed in magic. 

dj} Pharaoh assembled his magicians to challenge Moses at an appointed place and time. 

dj} The people were told: Are you going to gather to see who wins? Will it be Moses or the magicians? 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Adopting the means to protect oneself from the enemy does not negate faith and reliance in Allah. 

2. The creation of Allah indicates to His being the Lord and the One worthy of worship. 

3. Weakness of argument is one of the reasons for using violence. 

4. Inciting the masses against the people of religion is the style of the transgressors. 


LW5> ^ j ^ j > oi 

j <4,2^ 663^ ($) 

CO ols (_)lS f"^ ) l, v~^ J\S® 

j\ lytS^z^zc}' -Ljj ^ -La> 61 1 

w Al-Shuara 















SyL* j^\\^a\^\ l^y*j*4f> 5 ^ 00^1^^ 5 ^ \ %j^3 


© If the magicians succeed over Moses, perhaps 
we should follow them in their religion. 

©) So when the magicians came before Pharaoh to 
challenge Moses, they said to him, “Will we have a 
tangible reward or an intangible one, if we have the 
upper hand over Moses?” 

© Pharaoh said to them, “Yes, you shall get a re¬ 
ward. If you are to succeed over Moses, you shall 
be taken as my close ones by being appointed in 
lofty posts.” 

© Confident in Allah’s help and in order to show 
clearly that whatever he possessed was not magic, 
Moses said to them, “Throw whatever ropes and 
sticks you want to!” 

© And so they threw down their ropes and sticks, 
and upon throwing them, said, “By the grandeur of 
Pharaoh we are going to succeed, and Moses is the 
one who shall be defeated!” 

© So Moses threw his staff and it turned into a 
snake, nullifying whatever magic they were casting 
over the people. 

© When the magicians saw Moses’s staff swallow¬ 
ing up whatever they had cast, they fell into pros¬ 
tration. 

© They said, “I have brought faith in the Lord of 
all creation.” 

© “The Lord of Moses and Aaron (peace be upon 
them).” 

© Pharaoh, disapproving of the magicians’ belief, 
said to them, “Have you accepted Moses as being 
true, before I gave you permission to do so? Indeed, 
Moses is your mentor who has taught you magic; 
you have all collaborated to exile the people of 
Egypt from its lands, and you will soon see what punishment I inflict upon you. I shall cut off a hand and leg of each of 
you from opposite sides, and crucify you all on palm trunks, sparing no one.” 

© The magicians said to Pharaoh, “There is no big deal in the crucifixion and maiming you threaten us with in this world, 
because your punishment will end, while we shall return to our Lord who shall enter us into His everlasting mercy.” 

© “Due to us being the first ones to bring faith in Moses, we hope greatly that Allah erases the sins we have committed 
in the past.” 

© And I revealed to Moses commanding him to march the Israelites out at night, because Pharaoh and his people would 
pursue them, forcing them back. 

© So when Pharaoh came to know of the Israelites escaping, he sent some of his army into the cities, rallying the rest 
of the armies. 

© Pharaoh said, undermining the Israelites, “Indeed, these people are very few in number.” 

© And they will do things which will incite us against them. 

© Indeed, we are alert and prepared for them. 

© So I took Pharaoh and his people out of the land of Egypt, which had abundant gardens, flowing streams and wealth. 
U It also had treasures of wealth and beautiful dwellings. 

© As I took Pharaoh and his people out of it, I made the Israelites inherit it. 

© Pharaoh and his people caught the trail of the Israelites at sunrise. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The relationship of the people of falsehood among themselves is based on materialistic interest. 

2. Moses was confident of the help of Allah over the magicians, believing in the promise of his Lord. 

3. The magicians eventually believing is proof that Allah is the turner of hearts; He turns them however He wishes. 

4. The people of tyranny take refuge in violence due to being incapable of challenging evidence with evidence. 

5. Tyranny and oppression is a cause of one’s authority diminishing. 


c ‘ ) \ j \i \ A_V^_ lyCSj* 

{^) (£) 

















o' 1 oi^y 0 (ju^XiL tX5 <^> j 

( JjljylS_ y pt3 ^ La^e^y?! 

oI^==Iaj ^Lita <j51($) L^y>^ \ >5 0 1 


o 


5y33 '^GyCLz 

(^oy 1 

^ ^ .-' 'i'^j ( __ ;»^_ <5 I 


40 


'!* 


i £ 


3 So when the two groups came into view of each 
other, Moses’s people said, “we are definitely going 
to be captured!” 

When Pharaoh and his people drew closer to Moses 
and his people, such that each person was in view 
of the other on the opposite side, Moses’s people 
said, “Indeed, Pharaoh and his people will catch up 
with us and we are powerless against them.” 

3 Moses said to his people: “It is not as you have 
imagined it to be, for My Lord is with me support¬ 
ing and helping me. He shall guide and show me 
the path to salvation.” 

3 And so I revealed to Moses commanding him to 
strike the sea with his staff, which he did. The sea 
parted, turning into twelve paths: the same number 
as the tribes of the Israelites, and each parted seg¬ 
ment was like a great mountain in its grandeur and 
stability, such that no water flowed from it. 

3 I made Pharaoh and his people draw closer un¬ 
til they entered the sea, thinking that the path was 
traversable. 

3 And I saved Moses and whoever was with him 
from the Israelites; none from among them per¬ 
ished. 

3 I then destroyed Pharaoh and his people by 
drowning them in the sea. 

3 Indeed, in the parting of the sea for Moses, his 
salvation from Pharaoh and Pharaoh’s destruction, 
is a miracle proving the truthfulness of Moses. The 
majority of those with Pharaoh were not believers, 
they were rejecters. 

3 O Messenger! Indeed, your Lord is the almighty 
who takes retribution from His enemies, yet merci¬ 
ful to those of them who repent. 

3 O Messenger! Recite unto them the story of Abraham. 

<3 When he said to his father Azar and his people, “What do you worship instead of Allah?” 

3 His people said to him, “I worship idols, whose worship I remain firm upon and hold fast to.” 

3 Abraham said to them, “Do the idols hear your prayers when you supplicate to them?” 

3 “Or do they benefit you if you feed them, or harm you if you disobey them?” 

3 They said, They do not hear us when we supplicate to them, nor do they benefit us when we feed them, nor harm us if 
we disobey them. However, the reality is that we found our forefathers doing that, so we follow them. 

3 Abraham said, “Have you contemplated over and realised what idols you actually worship instead of Allah?” 

3 “And what your forefathers before used to worship?” 

3 “Because they are all my enemies; they are all false except for the Lord of all creation.” 

3 “The one who created me and it is He who will guide me to the best of this world and the Hearafter.” 

3 “The being who alone feeds me when I am hungry and gives me drink when I am thirsty.” 

3 “And when I am ill, He alone cures me from illness; there is no healer for me except Him.” 

3 “The being who alone will cause me to die when my lifespan expires and will resurrect me after I die.” 

3 “The being in who alone I hope will forgive my sins on the day of requital.” 

3 Abraham, supplicating to his Lord, said, “O my Lord! Grant me a deep understanding of religion and join me up with 
the pious prophets who came before me, by entering me into paradise with them.” 

Beneficial Points: 

1. A believer should have firm reliance in his Lord. 

2. Allah is always helping, supporting and saving his believing servants from difficulties. 

3. Allah is Mighty and Merciful. 

4. The foolishness of the idolaters in that they worship idols that do not hear and cannot cause benefit nor harm. 

5. The harm of following blindly. 

6. The hope a believer has in his Lord should be immense. 


370~ Part 19~ 


Al-Shuara 




















V^ 


pi<4 '^£-^3 ($) ^ 05 (^) l«6^ 

i-AibgJ^^ Oj^*^ $l)\a >oj>(^) l)J^x^j | 

^jy_3 0 cj4)1?($) I 

Ja ££0oj £yj jjyyyy 0 E 


lP^I -L*^ 9 QjeljO 9Jft (^) 0_j^l^ioj ^ 

^\\ 3 J^\Xaj 0 Oi-Aj*i \ ^i($) Cf^S^ 


^U 9 ^ 

y&VaJ AjS/ctilS ( i t^)0/ 

OT(£) 

10 CD^V' ri 5 j£j^U ~4 3 \|i 0 )^UlijIii 
Js_i£^\ liaj 0<^*4’)S *Uit\yi3& 00^3 

I ^ ^0 ^ ^ ^ £• ^ 

4J^' '_*»^-jl3 (n^) t * A>Ol^ ^ L-->J oi^rT^ 05 5“^ 

($) O^ ij^ \ ^lJjiJj\j 05^^ Vj) \S - 0C^y*-^J 


@ And grant me a true reputation of honour with 
the generations after me. {jj} And make me from 
among those who inherit the dwellings of paradise 
wherein your believing servants shall reside in lux¬ 
ury; grant me residence in them, (jjj) And forgive 
my father. Indeed, he was one of those who deviat¬ 
ed from the truth due to idolatry. Abraham suppli¬ 
cated on behalf of his father before it became clear 
to him that he was from among the people of hell. 
When that became clear to him, he proclaimed his 
disassociation with him and no longer supplicated 
for him. @ Do not humiliate me with punishment 
on the day people are resurrected to be taken to ac¬ 
count. @ On the day when the wealth he accumu¬ 
lated in this world shall not benefit nor his children 
that used to support him. @ Except for the one who 
brings a perfect heart: one free of idolatry, hypoc¬ 
risy, ostentation and arrogance. That is because he 
would have benefitted from his wealth which was 
spent in the path of Allah and his children, who 
would pray for him. (jp Paradise will be brought 
nearer to those who were mindful of their Lord, by 
fulfilling His commands and refraining from His 
prohibitions. @ Hellfire will be exposed on the 
plains of resurrection for the deviants who deviat¬ 
ed from the truth. ^ It will be said in rebuke to 
them, “Where are the idols you used to worship?” 
@ “You used to worship them instead of Allah? 
Will they help you by preventing the punishment of 
Allah from you, or will they be able to help them¬ 
selves?” |§p Then, they will be thrown into hell one 
on top of the other, together with whoever they led 
astray. 

(§p The helpers of Iblls are all satans, without exception. (S|p The idolaters who worshipped other than Allah and took them 
as partners to Him, will say whilst arguing with those they used to worship, @) “By Allah we were deviant from the clear 
truth.” @ “When we regarded you as equals to the Lord of all creation and worshipped you like we worshipped Him.” 

(jp “None led us astray from the path of truth except those criminals who called us towards worshipping them instead of 
Allah.” |H “So we have no intercessors today who shall intercede for us in front of Allah, to save us from His punish¬ 
ment.” H| “Neither do we have a true devoted friend who will defend and intercede for u.” (jp “If only we could return 
once more to the worldly life, so that we could be from those who believed in Allah.” (jp Indeed, in the aforementioned, 
i.e. the story of Abraham (peace be upon him) and the ultimate abode of the rejecters, is a lesson for those who take heed. 
Although most of them do not believe; they were rejecters of what Abraham brought from his Lord. 

(jf| O Messenger! Indeed, your Lord is the almighty who takes retribution from His enemies, yet merciful to those of 
them who repent. (S|| The people of Noah disbelieved in all the messengers when they rejected Noah (peace be upon him). 
(||| When Noah said to them, “Will you not be mindful of Allah and leave the worship of other than Him, out of fear 
for Him?” |f| “Indeed, I am a Messenger for you; Allah has sent me to you and I am trustworthy, I will not increase or 
decrease in that which has be revealed to me.” |f| “So be mindful of Allah by fulfilling His commandments and refrain 
from that which He has prohibited. And obey me in whatever I command you with and forbid you from.” “I do not 
seek any reward from you for what I convey to you from my Lord. My reward is only from Allah: the Lord of all creation, 
not from anyone else.” ($p “So be mindful of Allah by fulfilling His commandments and refrain from that which He has 
prohibited. And obey me in whatever I command you with and forbid you from.” @) His people said to him, “O Noah! 
Should we believe you and follow what you have brought and act upon it, whilst your followers are the lowliest of people; 
there are no leaders and noblemen among them?” 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The importance of keeping the heart free of illnesses such as jealousy, ostentation and arrogance. 2. Admitting the 
truth on the Day of Judgment will be of no benefit. 3. Attributing the responsibility of deviance to those who lead people 
astray will not benefit the deviants. 4. Those who call towards Allah await their reward from Allah, not His servants. 



















OyC^Jc \yX^= tlj^AcUj J\i 
\ \j\ oi($) Oi^l^bjUa^ Uj (^) OJ^cJlSjfi 


£30 


dfe 

^ ^ __ ^ £.^ # _- | 

l)^>c2L^ ^ I 

^ ^ ^ ^ -»^p 9 -f_ 2 ^ I 

lA^=»Uj A^S/^Dta j 61($)03S^' ijo.U3^3$($) 
c^XS_3 ok5 

jV l^j (JjJ) OjL^y^ 4j^\\^3\i (j^) J>4 j I 


|p Noah (peace be upon him) said to them, “What 
do I know of what these believers used to do? I am 
not an overseer over them that I account for their 
deeds.” 

|p “Their accountability is only to Allah who 
knows their secret and public affairs, not to me. If 
you realised, you would not have said what you just 
did.” 

|p “I am not going to push away these believers 
from my gathering in acceptance of your wished, 
just so that you believe.” 

|p “I am only a clear warner; I warn you of the 
punishment of Allah.” 

|p His people said to him, “If you do not stop call¬ 
ing towards what you’re calling us towards, you 
will definitely be harrassed and stoned to death.” 

@ Supplicating to his Lord, Noah said, “O my 
Lord! Indeed, my nation has rejected me and not 
believed in what I have brought from you to be 
true.” 

(jj| “So judge between me and them such that they 
are destroyed due to their insistence on falsehood 
and save me and those believers who are with me, 
from the punishment you destroy the disbelievers 
with.” 

(ff| So I answered his supplication and saved him 
and the believers with him in the ark, which was 
full of people and animals. 

|p Then I drowned the remaining rest, who were 
the people of Noah. 

|p Indeed, in the aforementioned, i.e. the story of 
Noah and his people, the saving of Noah and the 
believers with him and the destruction of the disbe¬ 
lievers from his nation, is a lesson for those who take heed. Although most of them do not believe; they were rejecters. 
HI O Messenger! Indeed, your Lord is the almighty who takes retribution from His enemies, yet merciful to those of 
them who repent. 

|p The people of ‘Ad disbelived in all the messengers by their rejection of Hud (peace be upon him). 

|p Remember when their brother, the prophet Hud said to them, “Will you not be mindful of Allah and leave the worship 
of other than Him, out of fear for Him?” 

|p “Indeed, I am a Messenger for you; Allah has sent me to you and I am trustworthy, I will not increase or decrease in 
that which has be revealed to me.” 

|p “So be mindful of Allah by fulfilling His commandments and refrain from that which He has prohibited. And obey me 
in whatever I have commanded you with and forbidden you from.” 

|p “I do not seek any reward from you for what I convey to you from my Lord. My reward is only from Allah: the Lord 
of all creation, not from anyone else.” 

Ip “Why are you building upon every elevated, overlooking place a building as a marker, unnecessarily, without any 
benefit in it for you in the world or the afterlife?” |p “And why do you build forts and palaces as if you were to live 
forever in this world, never to depart from it?” |p “And when you attack a place, you attack like tyrants, killing and with 
violence, showing no kindness or mercy.” |p “So be mindful of Allah by fulfilling His commandments and refrain from 
that which He has prohibited. And obey me in whatever I command you with and forbid you from.” |p “And fear the 
wrath of Allah who has granted you everything which you know well.” |p “He granted you many bounties, and granted 
you offspring.” |p “And He granted you gardens and flowing streams.” |p O my people! I fear the punishment of the 
great day over you: the Day of Judgement, (jp His people said to him, “Your warning us and not warning us is the same 
to us, for we shall never believe in you and will never turn away from whatever we are doing.” 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The people of falsehood take refuge in violence when they are cornered with proofs. 2. The oppressors being destroyed 
and believers being saved is a divine custom of Allah. 3. The dangers of being wholly dependant on the world. 4. The 
stubbornness of the people of falsehood and their insistence upon it. 


| cl) 9 0 9 ( fo ) 2u\e 

Ol-HJ Jj) 


Al-Shuara 


372 




















@ This is nothing but the religion of the people of 
the past, their habits and their character. 

(jl| And we are not going to be punished. 

(jp) They continued rejecting their prophet Hud 
(peace be upon him), so I destroyed them due to 
their rejection by a barren wind. Indeed, there is a 
lesson in their destruction for those who take heed. 
Although most of them do not believe; they were 
rejecters. 

HI O Messenger! Indeed, your Lord is the almighty 
who takes retribution from His enemies, yet merci¬ 
ful to those of them who repent. 

The Thamud disbelieved in all the messenger by 
their rejection of Saleh (peace be upon him). 

HI Remember when their brother in lineage Saleh 
said to them, “Will you not be mindful of Allah and 
leave the worship of other than Him, out of fear 
for Him?” 

HI “Indeed, I am a Messenger for you; Allah has 
sent me to you and I am trustworthy, I will not in¬ 
crease or decrease in that which has be revealed to 
me.” 

(jp) “So be mindful of Allah by fulfilling His com¬ 
mandments and refrain from that which He has pro¬ 
hibited. And obey me in whatever I have command¬ 
ed you with and forbidden you from.” 

(jf| “I do not seek any reward from you for what I 
convey to you from my Lord. My reward is only 
from Allah: the Lord of all creation, not from an¬ 
yone else.” 

HI “Do you expect to be left alone in whatever 
goodness and bounties you are in, in safety and 
without fear?” 


|p “In gardens and amongst flowing springs.” 

HI “Among crops and palms, the fruits of which are tender and delicate.” 

HI “And you skilfully carve out houses from the mountains, in which you then live.” 

Hi “So be mindful of Allah by fulfilling His commandments and refrain from that which He has prohibited. And obey me 
in whatever I have commanded you with and forbidden you from.” 

(S§J) “And do not submit to the commands of those who are immoderate on themselves by committing sins.” 

j|| “Those who cause corruption on Earth by spreading sins and do not rectify themselves by holding on to the obedience 

of Allah.” 

HI His people said to him, “You are surely one of those who have been bewitched repeatedly until the magic has over¬ 
powered your intellect and driven you crazy.” |1| “You are nothing but a human like us; you do not have any privilege 
over us which makes you worthy of being a Messenger, so bring a sign that proves you are a Messenger if indeed you 
are truthful in your claim to be one.” Ip After Allah had given Saleh a sign that was in the form of the she-camel which 
Allah extracted from the rock, he said to them, “This is a she-camel which can be seen and felt, it will have a share of 
the water as you also have a known share. It will not drink on the day scheduled for you, neither shall you make your 
livestock drink on the day scheduled for it.” |p “Do not harm it by way of hitting it or cutting its legs, otherwise the 
punishment of Allah will come upon you and destroy you on a distressing day, due to the affliction that comes down on 
it.” |p So they agreed upon cutting its legs, and the most wretched from them all did the act. Then they regretted the deed 
they had committed because of realising that the punishment was about to befall them inevitably. However, regret after 
seeing the punishment is of no benefit. |p So the punishment that they were promised seized them: it was an earthquake 
accompanied by a scream. Indeed, in the aforementioned, i.e. the story of Saleh and his people, is a lesson for those who 
take heed. Although most of them do not believe; they were rejecters. |p O Messenger! Indeed, your Lord is the almighty 
who takes retribution from His enemies, yet merciful to those of them who repent. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Rejecting one prophet means rejecting every Messenger. 2. Reminding people of the bounties of Allah brings hope in 
servants believing and returning to Allah. 3. Sins are a cause of corruption on Earth. 













_ *c ^ ^o j ^ ^ s' $ ''T >u 

U 9( ^ (^c^Jjgi 94^^ »^Jo(^)lJA^ U^D^>^==iJc3l(^ 


V-Jl 


J£^2j 4i>oJ o^ ^($) Oj^ ja$ j^J^ljt 

{^) 0^]^ ^ S^4^-^cil3 Oi^^ 


-OJ 


^ ^ ^ ^ ^ _ <b£-_ 

lO^Uaj tSfe' $/ s\jw?)i' rio jjJJHla^ c-L^S Oa* 




J\s ^00^"/^ 

\iaj{wjJ 4J S]jk3%i^)Cy^ <\yS 

"yjjI^RjI^3\ ^001^1*5 \ oj oL^ u£ 

(Ja?) Vj 

^^Xu^jej^ \ ^y^^j^xS\ ^&\\Jj>^Hj 


HI The people of Lut disbelieved in all the messen¬ 
gers by their rejection of Lut (peace be upon him). 

(jfj) Remember when their brother in lineage Lot 
said to them, Will you not be mindful of Allah by 
leaving idolatry, fearing Him? 

(jf| “Indeed, I am a Messenger for you; Allah has 
sent me to you and I am trustworthy, I will not in¬ 
crease or decrease in that which has be revealed to 
me.” 

HI “So be mindful of Allah by fulfilling His com¬ 
mandments and refrain from that which He has pro¬ 
hibited. And obey me in whatever I command you 
with and forbid you from.” 

HI “I do not seek any reward from you for what I 
convey to you from my Lord. My reward is only 
from Allah: the Lord of all creation, not from an¬ 
yone else.” 

fH “Do you seek sexual gratification from males?” 

HI “Whilst neglecting sexual gratification from the 
front passages of your wives Allah has created for 
you? You have indeed transgressed the limits of Al¬ 
lah by this detestable absurdity.” 

|f| His people said to him, “O Lot! If you do not 
stop forbidding us from this act and rebuking us 
over it, you and those with you shall be exiled from 
our city.” 

HI Lot said to them, “Indeed, I am one of those who 
dislike and hate this act of yours.” 

HI Supplicating to his Lord, he said, “O my Lord! 

Save me and my family from whatever punishment 
is going to afflict these people because of the evil 
they commit.” 

|f| So I accepted his supplication and saved him 
and his whole family. 

(jf| Except for his wife because she was a disbeliever, so she ended up being one of those who perished and were de¬ 
stroyed. 

If! Then, after Lot and his family left the city of Sodom, I severely destroyed his people who remained behind. 

HI I rained down on them stones from the sky, just like we send down the rain. Disgraceful was the rain that befell these 
people, whom Lot used to warn of the punishment of Allah if they continued committing their evil acts. 

(jf| Indeed, in the aforementioned, i.e. the punishment that descended on the people of Lot because of their sexual inde¬ 
cency, is a lesson for those who take heed. Although most of them do not believe; they were rejecters. 

HI O Messenger! Indeed, your Lord is the almighty who takes retribution from His enemies, yet merciful to those of 
them who repent. 

HI The people of the Thicket close to Madyan rejected the Messengers when they rejected their prophet Shu‘ayb (peace 
be upon him). 

(j|| When their prophet Shu‘ayb said to them, “Will you not be mindful of Allah by leaving idolatry, fearing Him?” 

@ “Indeed, I am a Messenger for you; Allah has sent me to you and I am trustworthy, I will not increase or decrease in 
that which has be revealed to me.” |f|) “So be mindful of Allah by fulfilling His commandments and refrain from that 
which He has prohibited. And obey me in whatever I have commanded you with and forbidden you from.” |f| “I do not 
seek any reward from you for what I convey to you from my Lord. My reward is only from Allah: the Lord of all crea¬ 
tion, not from anyone else.” HI “When you sell to the people, measure for them properly. Do not be people who reduce 
measure when selling to people.” (j§| “And when you weigh for others, weigh with properly functioning scales.” “And 
do not violate the rights of people and cause excessive corruption on Earth by committing sins.” 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Sodomy is an abnormality from nature and a grave evil. 2. The people of corruption and falsehood being destroyed 
and the people of truth being saved is a divine custom of Allah. 3. As long as worldly relationships are not accompanied 
with faith, they will not benefit when the punishment descends. 4. It is obligatory to measure fully and forbidden to be 
deficient in measure. 























| \S C yjjSJ \ 4LsU $j^ klg-c$4^^WL> U 

ok3 1 cH^^X^5(nao) 

^ cu^O 1 0^^^^ 0 

>^Ji<^\3x> sl^VjlAs 

^jflj\£===*\ A^y <i)JS cioi 

OUlL(w)O^X-ii( ^O^idLii^-tw) O^aS ^ \ 



0D^^Li) c^j^S ($)02-r* Qu^ 


<L9 


^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ upon them that burned them. The day they were 

^o6^> l> {^) ck J O^ J 4, destroyed was an extremely horrific day. 


</© 


,Vpai(tu) &* 



ci^lA^=== 3 (^) 1 ‘ yv^A>^^Aj 

A3\ a*J \ Zfy^r^ ^ l-^ 13 <j 

(^> ViiS ^ 

\ *cr ^r\^ \<^ <t>s ^ >vc.*>** jC ful to those of them who re P cnt 

^ m indeed, this Qur’an that w 

t^P ^L>-aA)[ ^oL * YC^l^J jy ^ 2*-^° (^)^ 


“And be mindful of the one who created you 
and created the previous nations, by fearing that He 
sends down His punishment upon you.” 

HI Shu‘ayb’s people said to him, “You are definite¬ 
ly one of those who have been victim of sorcery re¬ 
peatedly, until it has overpowered your intelligence 
and driven you crazy.” 

HI “You are only a human like us and have no priv¬ 
ilege over us, so how could you be a Messenger? I 
think of you only to be a liar in your claim to be a 
Messenger.” 

|l| “So if you are truthful in your claim, cause a 
piece of sky to fall upon us.” 

HI Shu‘ayb said to them, “My Lord is better aware 
of the idolatry and sins you commit; none of your 
actions are hidden from Him.” 

@ They continued rejecting him and so a grave 
punishment afflicted them by way of a cloud ap¬ 
pearing after a severely hot day. It rained a fire 


Indeed, in the aforementioned i.e. the destruc¬ 
tion of the people of Shu‘ayb, is a lesson for those 
who take heed. Although most of them do not be¬ 
lieve; they were rejecters. 

(jfj) O Messenger! Indeed, your Lord is the almighty 
who takes retribution from His enemies, yet merci- 


was revealed to Mu¬ 
hammad (peace be upon him), was revealed by the 
Lord of all creation. 

|§S) It was revealed through the trustworthy Gabriel 
(peace be upon him). 

O Messenger! He revealed it upon your heart so that you become one of the Messengers who warn the people and 
make them fearful of the punishment of Allah. 

(ff! He revealed it in clear Arabic language. 

HI And indeed this Qur’an has been referenced in the previous Books; the previous divine books have given glad tidings 
of it. 

@ Was it not a sign of your truthfulness for these people who reject you, that the scholars of the Israelites like Abdullah 
bin Salam, knew the reality of what has been revealed to you? 

Ip Had we revealed this Qur’an upon one of the non-Arabs who do not speak Arabic. 

HI And then they were to read it to them, they would not become believers, because they would say, “I do not understand 
it!” So they should praise Allah that it was revealed in their language. 

|| Likewise, we placed rejection and disbelief in the hearts of the criminals because of their wrongdoing. 

HI They do not change from the state of disbelief they are in, and will not believe until they see the painful punishment. 
(j§D This punishment will come to them suddenly and unexpectedly. 

H So when the punishment will come upon them suddenly, they will say out of immense grief, “Will we be given respite 
to repent to Allah?” 

H Do these disbelievers seek our punishment hastily, saying, “We will never believe in you until you cause the sky to 
fall upon us in pieces, just as you claim it will.” 

(j| H O Messenger! So tell me, How will it if I was to let these disbelievers enjoy the bounties for a lengthy period of 
time and then the punishment they were promised came to them after that period of enjoyment. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Objections can be raised against the idolaters with the confessions of the moderate from among the people of the book 
that the Qur’an is from Allah. 

2. There is no benefit in bringing faith after seeing the destructive punishment. 

3. Whatever bounties of the world the disbelievers have are causes of them gradually falling into destruction, not hospi¬ 
tality. 
















ol/O l^J (^O^o^l^===Uj (j£) OjD -VJ> I4J 




giEJT 

($) 0^J3^^1^\3(j^<ir^Xi^V^5. 

j 1 '^\ (j^ )\$ ( ^ ) t‘ AX-^j^ \ / * r°^-L\X^ ^y^cl\gAx>- 

L 5^\(jw) ^J^j ($) 


"1 * 


cJ_>CS 3>o c 

(^ <1^ -4 ^ lK 

j\j J^==== (^L^Mjpjil 0 

O^' ^ )j”j) U ,>4^5 (j^) OjX-^J 

<^2)_?^v a -'-'L9 \^jbdJ>i\ \})J^\2 0->ei^-^?3\ 

^ ^ 

^ UJSAJ^ oo5 \ jXi^-^j L® aIo 


What worldly bounties which they were en- *|g^feg | 

joying, would benefit them? Verily, those bounties 
would have finished, and they will not be of any 
use. 

|1| I did not destroy any nation except they were 
warned by sending messengers to them and reveal¬ 
ing books. 

HI Which served as admonitions and warnings for 
them. I was not oppressive by punishing them after 
establishing an excuse, by sending them Messen¬ 
gers and books. 

|!| The satans did not come down with this Qur’an 
upon the heart of Muhammad (peace be upon him); 
j!| it is permissible that they come down with it 
onto his heart. They are not even capable of doing 
that. 

|f| They are incapable of doing so because they 
have been cut off from its place in the heavens, so 
how could they reach it and then bring it down? 

HI So do not worship any deity with Allah and as¬ 
cribe it to Him. Otherwise, you will be one of those 
who shall be punished. 

(j| O Messenger! Warn your closest relatives from 
your people, in order of strength in relationship, 
lest the punishment of Allah does not afflict them if 
they remain upon idolatry. 

|f| And be kind in action and speech, out of mercy 
and gentleness, to those believers who follow you. 

|!J If they disobey you and do not accept proclaim¬ 
ing the oneness of Allah and His obedience you 
command them with, then say to them, “I proclaim 
innocence from the idolatry and sins you commit.” 

|!| And place your reliance in all your affairs upon 
the Almighty who takes retribution from His enemies and is merciful to whoever repents to Him from them. 

2 \ s , The being, may He be glorified, who sees you when you stand towards prayer. 

|j| And He sees you changing from posture to posture among those who pray. Nothing is hidden from Him, neither any 
action you undertake, nor anyone else undertakes. 

{j| Indeed, He is the hearer of the Qur’an you recite and remembrance you do in your prayer, knower of your intention. 
When they claimed that the satans come down with the Qur’an and that Muhammad (peace be upon him) is a poet, Allah 
refuted their claim, saying, 

H) “Shall I inform you who the satans actually come down to, as you have claimed that they come down with the 
Qur’an?” 

flj “They come down to every fortune-teller, who is a perpetual liar, sinner and disobeyer.” 

(jp “The satans eavesdrop on the exalted assembly of angels and then convey that information to their fortune-teller 
friends. The majority of fortune tellers are liars; if they are truthful in one statement, they tell a hundred lies with it. 
HI And as for the poets that you claim Muhammad (peace be upon him) is from, those deviant from the path of guidance 
and steadfastness follow them and relate whatever poetry they say. 

HI O Messenger! Do you not see that one of the manifestations of their errors is that they wander around in all the valleys, 
sometimes immersed in praise, sometimes in criticism, and many times in other issues! 

(£§| And indeed they lie, saying, “I did such and such”, while they did not actually do it. 

HI Except for those poets who have faith, perform good deeds, remember Allah abundantly and take retribution from the 
enemies of Allah after they have oppressed, like Hassan bin Thabit may Allah be pleased with him. Those who committed 
wrong by ascribing partners to Allah and showing hostility to His servants, will soon know what their place of return will 
be: they will return to a great place and a meticulous accounting. 

Beneficial Points: 

1. Affirmation of justice for Allah and negating oppression from Him. 2. Declaration of the Qur’an being free of any 
satans having approached it. 3. The importance of gentleness and friendliness for the callers towards Allah. 

4. Good poetry is good, while repulsive poetry is repulsive. 


m ss 





















rvv 




The Ant (Surah an-Naml) 


|^| iS^Aj iS> {^) c&f <-^1^==^} 04 ) *■ 

i 't y' - = ^j ^ cjJpyij \ oyi^Oi-^0 

j >4 St^dl0 L)_Jiji 

^\j^\ £}4o>^j4jo £4fc*^ 

^\j$) ^p^-S3-5^ 

I V^ <Ag>~\wqA3 (-^r^ g- ^ _J^\^t- 

CSj 4 $ z$>CJuQ+Jcsbjtti c£^> 

I jiy+a&i^ <h\ ( ^ f Yt4^' 

1 J^Sl (^^444^1^4 cl} "dQ0^y^ Ia\^}uS 

1 




ii)\L^> oJp^cllc4^^4i <4 %y j tff / 


® Topic of the Surah: 

It focuses on favouring the Prophet (peace be upon 
him) through the miracle of the Qur’an, being 
grateful for it, and being patient in conveying it. 

® Explanation: 

(JfJ Ta Sin. These are the verses of the Qur’an and 
a clear book. The discussion on similar letters 
has passed in the beginning of Surah Al-Baqarah. 
These verses which are revealed to you are verses 
of the Qur’an and a clear book in which there is no 
confusion. Whoever ponders upon it will know that 
it is from Allah. 

jjj) These verses guide to the truth and direct to¬ 
wards it, and give glad-tidings to those who bring 
faith in Allah and His Messengers. 

@ Those who perform prayer in the most complete 
^ manner and give Zakat of their wealth by spending 
it on its recipients, and they are convinced of the 
reward and punishment in the afterlife. 

© The disbelievers who do not bring faith in the 
afterlife and the reward and punishment therein -1 
adorned their bad deeds for them so they contin¬ 
ued in doing them, thus they are confused without 
finding their way towards what is right or guidance, 
(jj) Such people will suffer in the worldly life 
through trials and humiliation and in the Hereafter 
they suffer the greatest loss, losing themselves and 
their families on the Day of Judgement and entering 
Hell forever. 

@ O Messenger, you are receiving this Qur’an 
which is being revealed to you from one who is 
Wise in His creating, managing and legislating, and Knowing, with nothing of the interests of His servants being hidden 
from Him. 

@ Remember, O Messenger, when Moses said to his family: “I have seen a fire. I shall bring some news from it, from 
the person who lit it to guide us towards the path, or I shall I bring you a flame of fire taken from it, in the hope that you 
will light a fire from it to warm yourselves from the cold”. 

jj} Then when he reached the place of the fire that he saw, Allah called unto him that the one in the fire and the angels 
surrounding it are blessed. 

jj) Allah said to him: “O Moses, it is I, Allah, the Mighty whom nobody can overpower, Wise in My creating, managing 
and legislating. 

And throw down your staff’. Moses obeyed. Then when Moses saw it moving and shaking like a snake, he fled turn¬ 
ing his back to it and did not return. So Allah said to him: “Do not be scared of it. The Messengers do not fear snakes or 
anything else in my presence. 

@ However, whoever wrongs himself by committing a sin, then repents after that, I am Forgiving to him, Merciful to 
him. 

dj) And put your hand in the opening of your shirt; it will come out after entering it white like snow without being due 
to leprosy, as part of nine signs which testify to your truthfulness. Along with the hand, they are: the staff, famine, loss 
of fruits, floods, locusts, lice, frogs, and blood, towards Pharaoh and his people. They were a people left the obedience 
of Allah by disbelieving in him. 

@ So when these clear and apparent signs of Mine with which I aided Moses came to them, they said: “These signs 
which Moses has brought are clear magic”. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The Qur’an is guidance and glad tidings for the believers. 

2. Disbelief in Allah is a means of following false actions and statements, bewilderment and confusion. 

3. Allah granted security and protected His Messengers from all evil. 



























rvA 



@ They disbelieved in these miracles and did not 
accept them, despite being convinced they are from 
Allah, due to their wrongdoing and their arrogance 
from the truth. So contemplate, O Messenger, how 
was the outcome of those who cause corruption on 
earth, due to their disbelief and disobedience; I de¬ 
stroyed them and eradicated all of them. 

(Sjj) I granted David and his son Solomon knowl¬ 
edge, part of which was the language of birds. Da¬ 
vid and Solomon said, in gratitude to Allah: “All 
praise is for Allah who has given us virtue over 
many of his believing servants, through propheth- 
ood and subjugating the jinns”. 

@ And Solomon inherited from his father in 
prophethood, knowledge and kingdom, and he said, 
relating Allah’s favour on him and his father: “O 
people, Allah has taught us the language of birds 
and given us of everything He gave to the prophets 
and kings. This which He has given us is the clear, 
apparent grace”. 

@ And for Solomon his armies of men, jinns and 
birds were gathered, and they were being led or¬ 
derly. 

They were being led until when they came to the 
valley of ants (a place in the Levant), one of the ants 
said: “O ants, enter your homes so that Solomon 
and his armies do not destroy you whilst they do 
not know of you, because if they know of you they 
will not trample you”. 

When Solomon heard it saying this, he smiled 
due to this statement of his and he said, calling unto 
his Lord: “O Lord, enable me and inspire me to be 
grateful for Your favour which You gave to me and 
My parents, and enable me to do good actions which please you, and enter me amongst Your righteous servants”. 

@ And Solomon took attendance of the birds but did not see the hoopoe, so he said: “What is with me that I do not see 
the hoopoe? Has something stopped me seeing it or is it from the absentees?” 

@ He said when its absence became clear to him: “I shall punish it severely, or I shall slaughter it as a punishment for 
being absent, unless it brings a clear proof to prove its excuse for absence”. 

@ The hoopoe remained absent for a short while. Then when it came, it said to Solomon (peace be upon him): “I discov¬ 
ered what you did not discover, and I have brought to you from Sheba true news in which there is no doubt. 

<!*} Beneficial Points: 

1. Pride is a hindrance to being guided to the truth. 

2. Being grateful for favours is the etiquette of the prophets and righteous with their Lord. 

3. Advising the people with what will prevent them from destruction is the way of intelligent individuals. 

4. One should make excuses for righteous people in their absence. 

5. Smiling is the laughing of dignified people. 

6. Citizens are managed by implementing punishment on those who deserve it and accepting the excuses of those who 
have a valid excuse. 

7. Sometimes juniors have knowledge which seniors do not. 


yy j ($) yyy 

yy yyyyyy$ 

cjy^y\ jJ yy yyyyyyyy 
















| as ii45 





(jp Indeed, I found [there] a woman ruling them, 
and she has been given of all things, and she has a 
great throne. 

I found a woman who rules them, and this woman 
has been given of all means of strength and king¬ 
dom, and she has a large throne on which she man¬ 
ages the affairs of her people. 

I found her and her people prostrating to the sun 
instead of Allah, and Satan has made their deeds 
pleasing to them and averted them from [His] way, 
so they are not guided. 

I found this woman and I found her people pros¬ 
trating to the sun instead of Allah, and Satan has 
beautified for them the actions of idolatry and sins 
they are on, so he has turned them away from the 
path of truth, and thus they are not guided to Him. 
@ [And] so they do not prostrate to Allah, who 
brings forth what is hidden within the heavens and 
the earth and knows what you conceal and what 
you declare. 

Satan has beautified for them their actions of idol¬ 
atry and sins, so that they do not prostrate to Allah 
alone, who brings the rain which He has hidden in 
the skies and the plants in the earth, and He knows 
the actions you hide and those you make apparent, 
none of this being hidden from Him. 

@ Allah - there is no deity except Him, Lord of 
the Great Throne. Allah - there is no true Allah be¬ 
sides, Lord of the Great Throne”, (jp [Solomon] 
said, ”1 will see whether you were truthful or were 

upon him) said to 
hoopoe: “I shall see if you are truthful in what 
you claim or were you amongst the liars”, {jp Take 
this letter of mine and deliver it to them. Then leave them and see what [answer] they will return.” So Solomon wrote 
a letter and handed it to the hoopoe, and said to it: “Take this letter of mine, and give it to the people of Saba and hand 
it over to them, and step aside from them so you can hear what they say discuss regarding it”. @ She said, “O eminent 
ones, indeed, to me has been delivered a noble letter. The queen received the letter and said: “O noble ones, a noble 
magnificent letter has been given to me. (jj) Indeed, it is from Solomon, and Indeed, it reads: ‘In the name of Allah, the 
Gracious, the Merciful. The content of this letter which has been sent by Solomon and which begins with: “In the name 
of Allah, the Gracious, the Merciful.” is: (S§p Be not haughty with me but come to me in submission [as Muslims].’ “ Do 
not be arrogant, and come to me obediently and submitting to what I call you towards, namely declaring Allah’s Oneness 
and leaving associating partners with Him which you are involved in, as you worshipped the sun alongside Him”. @ She 
said, “O eminent ones, advise me in my affair. I would not decide a matter until you witness [for] me.” The queen said: 
“O noble ones and leaders, explain to me the right course in my matter. I am not going to decide a matter until you come 
to me and present your opinions regarding it”. @ They said, “we are men of strength and of great military might, but the 
command is yours, so see what you will command.” The nobles from her people said: “We are people of great power and 
strong might in warfare, but the opinion is what you think, so see what you will command us to do; we are able to carry 
it out”. {§§) She said, “Indeed, kings - when they enter a city, they ruin it and render the honored of its people humbled. 
And thus do they do. The queen said: “When kings enter any city, they ruin it by the killing, seizing and looting they carry 
out, and they make its leaders and nobles disgraced, after the honour and protection they enjoyed. And this is how kings 
always behave when they conquer the people of a city, to plant the seeds of fear and awe in the hearts of the masses.” {j) 
But indeed, I will send to them a gift and see with what [reply] the Messengers will return.” I am sending a gift to the 
sender of the letter and his people, and I shall see what the messengers bring after sending this gift”. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The hoopoe’s criticism of the people of Sheba for their idolatry and disbelief is a proof that faith is natural amongst the 
creation. 2. It is necessary to investigate the one being accused and to verify his proofs. 3. It is permissible to investigate 
the affairs of the enemies. 4. Part of the etiquette of letters is to begin them with the name of Allah. 5. Expressing the 
honour of a believer in the presence of the people of falsehood is a desired matter. 


\ {^) \j*J 

Ip- \ ^ ^ 

^ K&- said, "l will see whether you wc 

0 f t h e ij ars Solomon (peace be 

_ __ LM the hoopoe: “I shall see if you a 


an-Nami 


379 





















© So when her messenger and his helpers who 
were with him came carrying the present to Sol¬ 
omon, he criticised them for sending the present, 
saying: “Are you providing me with wealth to turn 
me away from you? The prophethood, kingdom 
and wealth Allah has given me is better than what 
He has given you. In fact, it is you who are rejoic¬ 
ing on the short-term riches of the world you have 
been given”. 

© Solomon (peace be upon him) said to her 
messenger: “Return to them with the present you 
brought, for we will come to her and her people 
with armies they will not have the power to face, 
and we will remove them from Sheba disgracefully 
after the honour they were in, if they do not come 
to me obediently”. 

© Solomon (peace be upon him) said, addressing 
the prominent people of his kingdom: “O eminent 
ones, which one of you will bring me her royal 
throne before they come to me obediently?” 

© A rebellious jinn replied saying: “I shall bring 
her throne to you before you stand from the gather¬ 
ing you are in. I am strong enough to carry it, and 
can be trusted on what it contains, so I will not take 
anything of it”. 

© A pious knowledgeable man in the presence of 
Solomon who had knowledge of the scripture, part 
of which was the greatest name of Allah which Al¬ 
lah accepts prayers when supplicated through, said: 

“I shall bring her throne to you before your glance 
returns to you, by praying to Allah to bring it”. So 
he prayed, and Allah answered his prayer. When 
Solomon saw her throne placed before him, he said: 

“This is from the grace of my Lord, to test me whether I am grateful for his favours or ungrateful? Whoever is grateful 
to Allah, the benefit of his gratefulness will only return to him, because Allah is self sufficient, in no need of anything, is 
not benefitted or harmed by the gratefulness of His servants. And whoever rejects the favours of Allah and does not thank 
Him for them, my Lord is self-sufficient, in no need of being shown gratitude, and Generous. Part of His generosity is 
granting those who deny them”. 

© Solomon (peace be upon him) said: “Change her royal throne from its original form: we shall see: is she guided to 
recognising it is her throne or will she be from those who are not guided to recognising their own things?” 

© So when the queen of Sheba came to Solomon, it was said to her to test her: “Is this how your throne is?” She an¬ 
swered according to the question: “It is as though it was that”. Allah has granted us knowledge before her and we were 
submitting to Allah’s order and obeying Him. 

© And she was turned away from the Oneness of Allah by what she used to worship besides Allah, in following her peo¬ 
ple and blindly imitating them. She was amongst the people who disbelieve in Allah, so she was a disbeliever like them. 
© It was said to her: “Enter the palace” which was like a plane surface. When she entered it, she thought it was water 
and uncovered her shins to enter it. Solomon (peace be upon him) said: “It is a palace which has been made smooth with 
glass”. He called her to Islam, so she accepted what he called her towards, saying: “O Lord, I wronged myself by wor¬ 
shipping others besides You, and I have submitted with Solomon to Allah, Lord of all created things”. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The honour of faith protects a believer from being affected by the short-term riches of this world. 

2. Being happy with materialistic things and inclining towards them is a quality of the disbelievers. 

3. Supernatural acts are miracles for the pious and deception for the transgressors. 

4. A believer’s has an awakened realisation of Allah’s favors. 

5. Testing the intelligence of the opponent is so that he can be dealt with appropriately. 

6. Showing one’s superiority over the opponent is to affect him. 




rA* 



\jLA ^ l)\ C f slsjjo&x 

CAS (£} Xs 


an-Naml 380 





















I ij\ Xj&j jj^ 




$3^2^ Jti \j) \5{^) 

| oail e| ($) J> 

Jf^SXkl^i 

,0 ^9 *£ ^ ■ 

I »^==La fe\ ciiV-L^lj J^JliLa 

I 9 U^==t>>LjS-Sj j_>^==ua 

JXijJP 1 j\J>\ l^p^fl 2 Zjl_j>q\~==3 <J&^T 

&M&0 ><*~d 

| j^-«\A^;jJ\<~jJLLaO yp^ A^N (j 
^>_pl_3\2A_£ys3 Jll$i\l 


jgS> And I sent to Thamud their brother in lineage 
Salih (peace be upon him) saying “Worship Allah 
alone”, but they became two groups after his call¬ 
ing them: a believing group and the other disbeliev¬ 
ing, arguing over who is on the truth. 

@ Salih (peace be upon him) said: “why do you 
seek to hasten the punishment instead of seeking 
Allah’s mercy? Why do you not seek forgiveness 
from Allah for your sins, in the hope that he will 
forgive you?” 

@ His people said to him, in stubbornness from the 
truth: “I consider you and the believers with you a 
bad omen”. Salih (peace be upon him) said: “The 
birds that you drive away due to the difficulties 
that which has afflicted you from what you dislike 
and you attribute as a bad omen is actually decreed 
from Allah and He has knowledge of that. 

|jj} And in the city of Hijr there were nine men who 
would cause corruption on earth through disbelief 
and sins, and they would not reform in it through 
faith and good actions. 

^ They said to one another: “Each one of you 
should swear by Allah that we will go to him and 
the believers with him at night, then we will kill 
them and then say to the one responsible for aveng¬ 
ing his blood: ‘We were not present at the murder 
of Salih or the murder of his followers, and we are 
truthful in what we have said’”. 

And they secretly made a plan to destroy Salih 
and his followers amongst the believers, and I also 
made a plan to help him, save him from their plan 
and to destroy the disbelievers from his people, 
whilst they did not know that. 

@) So contemplate, O Messenger, what was the outcome and end of their planning and scheming; did they achieve what 
they were intending? No. In fact, I totally uprooted them with a punishment from Myself so they were all destroyed. 

(j|) So those are their homes whose walls have fallen on their roofs, and they have remained empty of inhabitants, due to 
their wrongdoing. In the punishment which has afflicted them due to their wrongdoing is a lesson for people who believe, 
as they are the ones who take lessons from the signs. 

@ And I saved those who believed from the people of Salih (peace be upon him), and they used to be mindful of Allah 
by carrying out His orders and refraining from His prohibitions. 

@ O Messenger, remember Lot when he said to his people, reprimanding them and criticising them: “Do you come to 
the indecent act, which is sodomy in your meetings, openly watching one another? 

|j§S) Do you come to men lustfully, leaving the women, not intending chastity or children but only to fulfil animalistic 
lust? But rather you are a people ignorant of what is necessary upon you, namely faith, purity and staying far from sins”. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Seeking forgiveness from sins is a means of Allah’s mercy. 

2. Taking bad omen from people and things is not from the qualities of the believers. 

3. The outcome of uniting upon evil and scheming against the people of truth is bad. 

4. Oppression is a cause of punishment descending on earth. 

5. Faith and piety are the means to salvation from Allah’s punishment. 

6. Openly committing evil is worse than doing it secretly. 

7. To condemn the people of vice and transgression is necessary. 




















Ji3>4 







\ Vj) L3 oW 1*3 * J;| 

V 5 a \~a]j 

-LU>jT <J3(^) ^ 4 ^ 

«.\^_ili\ QAjJ==^> Sj-^_} ljfcS^)j S^lf^® ^ 

^ r=a\ I* A «^r=s\ a A 

0 ^jjjo^i fi> J§tg l3<5 


(Sjp But his people did not have an answer besides 
their saying: “Remove the family of Lot from your 
city. They are a people who want to stay pure from 
dirt and impurity”. They said this to mock the fam¬ 
ily of Lot who would not join them in the immor¬ 
al acts they used to commit, but rather they would 
condemn them for committing them. 
f§p So we saved him and his family, except for his 
wife, who was decreed to be from those who re¬ 
mained behind for the punishment, so she may be 
from those who were destroyed. 

@ And I rained stones of baked clay on the peo¬ 
ple of Lot. Dreadful is the rain of those who have 
been warned such as the people of Lot who did not 
respond to him, and in fact remained on their disbe¬ 
lief, misguidance and committing immorality. 

@ O Messenger, say: “All praise is for Allah for 
his favours, and peace from him on His Messengers 
whom He chose to convey His religion”. Is Allah, 
the true Allah in whose Hand is the kingdom of 
everything, better or the Allahs which the idolaters 
worship, which do not possess benefit or harm? 

@ Is He not best who created the heavens and the 
earth without any precedent, and He sent down 
for you, O people, rainwater from the sky, then 
He grew for you gardens of beauty? It was not for 
you to grow the trees of these gardens, due to your 
being unable to do that. So it is Allah who grew 
them. Is there any true Allah alongside Allah? No, 
but rather they are a people who turn away from the 
truth, so they unjustly make the creation equal with 
the Creator. 

Is He not best who made the earth firm and still, 
without it shaking those on it, and made within it rivers that flow, and made for it firm mountains, and made between two 
seas, salty and sweet, a barrier which stops the salty mixing with the sweet so that it does not spoil it and then making it 
unsuitable for drinking? Is there a true Allah alongside Allah who can make all that happen? No, but most of them do not 
know. Had they known, they would not have associated any of Allah’s creation with Him as a partner. 
j^S) Is He not best who responds to the call of the distressed when he calls upon Him, seeking for his harm to be removed, 
and who removes what the human finds bad such as illness and poverty, and who makes you deputies on earth, succeed¬ 
ing one another generation after generation? Is there a true Allah alongside Allah who makes all that happen? No. Little 
do you take heed and consider. 

(j§) Is He not best who guides you in the darkness of the land and the darkness of the sea through the signs and stars He 
fixes for you, and who sends winds to give good news of close rainfall through which He will have mercy on His serv¬ 
ants? Is there a true Allah alongside Allah who makes all that happen and decrees it? Allah is purified and far removed 
from the partners the creation associate with Him 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The people of falsehood take refuge in violence when they are cornered with proofs. 

2. The relationship of marriage without faith will not benefit in the afterlife. 

3. The belief in Allah’s Oneness is made firm through reminding of Allah’s favours. 

4. Being distressed is one of the means of acceptance of prayers. 




























@ Is He not best who begins the creation in the 
wombs, stage after stage, then He will restore it af¬ 
ter He gives it death, and who provides you from 
the sky with water that descends from its direction, 
and who provides you from the earth with plants He 
makes grow therein? Is there a true Allah alongside 
Allah who makes all that happen and decrees it? 
Say - O Messenger, to these idolaters: “Bring your 
proofs for the idolatry you are on, if you are true in 
your claim that you are on the truth”. 

(jj) O Messenger, say: The Ghaib is not known by 
the angels in the heavens or the people on earth. 
However Allah alone is the one who knows it. And 
nobody in the heavens or the earth knows when 
they will be raised for recompense besides Allah. 
(j§S> But rather their knowledge in the afterlife will 
become complete, due to their seeing it with their 
own eyes after the Messengers used to inform them 
of it when it was unseen, but they used to deny 
it because they had not seen it. And they were in 
doubt and confusion regarding the afterlife in their 
worldly life, for their eyes and hearts had become 
blind towards it. 

@ Those who disbelieved said denyingly: “When 
we die and become dust, is it possible we will be 
raised alive? 

@ We were promised and our fathers were prom¬ 
ised before that we will all be raised, but we have 
not seen that promise come true. This promise we 
were all made is nothing but lies of the former peo¬ 
ple who recorded them in their books”. 

@ O Messenger! Say to these deniers of the res¬ 
urrection: “Travel in any direction on earth, then 
ponder over what was the outcome of the evildoers who denied the resurrection; I destroyed them due to their denying it”. 
(Sj§) Do not grieve due to the idolaters turning away from your call nor should your bosom become tight or should you 
worry due to their scheming against you, for Allah is with you and He will help you against them. 

@ The disbelievers amongst your people who deny the resurrection say: “When will the punishment you and the believ¬ 
ers promise us occur, if you are true in what you claim of that?” 

(j O Messenger, say to them: “Perhaps some of the punishment you are hastily seeking has already come near”. 

@ And your Lord, O Messenger, is graceful towards the people, as He is leaving punishing them quickly despite the 
disbelief and sins they are upon. However, most people do not thank Allah for the favours He gives them. 

And your Lord knows what the hearts of His servants hide and what they make apparent. None of that is hidden from 
Him. 

{j| And there is nothing hidden from the people in the sky nor anything hidden from them on earth except that it is in a 
clear book, which is the Preserved Tablet. 

@ This Qur’an which was revealed to Muhammad (peace be upon him) relates to the Israelites most of what they differ 
in, and it exposes their deviances. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The knowledge of the Ghaib is specifically for Allah. Making a claim to it is disbelief. 

2. Taking heed from the previous nations, with respect to their outcome and conditions, is the way to salvation. 

3. The Messenger (peace be upon him) was consoled and made firm in the face of the scheming of the idolaters. 

4. Allah’s knowledge encompasses the actions of His servants. 

5. The Qur’an corrects the deviances of the Israelites and their tampering of their books. 


tail 

0 j 0 









an-Nami 


Part 20 























4 


\&l 


l^_^(^) cyy.X^ V^_91 | 

5l?4 

251 ($) 5^4^ QP&^y I 

J \S__j £L-\i Vjlp- (^) oyjji >4^ 1*^4* -^v. j 


@ And it is a guidance and mercy for the believers 
who practice what it has brought. 
dj| O Messenger, your Lord will decide between 
the people, believers and disbelievers, on the day of 
judgment through His just judgment. He will have 
mercy on the believer and punish the disbeliever, 
and He is the Mighty who will take retribution from 
His enemies, with nobody to overpower Him, the 
Knowing to whom the truthful is not unclear from 
the liar. 

(jjS) So trust in Allah, and rely on Him in all your 
affairs. You are on the clear truth. 

@ O Messenger, you cannot make the dead whose 
hearts have died to their disbelief in Allah hear, nor 
can you make those who have lost their hearing 
hear what you are calling them towards when they 
return turning away from you. 

(SjjS And you are not one to guide those whose eyes 
are blind to the truth, so do not grieve over them 
and tire yourself. Only those will listen to your call 
who believe in our verses, because they submit to 
the orders of Allah. 

@ When the punishment becomes binding and es¬ 
tablished for them, due to their disbelief and sins, 
and the worst of people remain, I shall take out 
for them near to the Final Hour one of its greatest 
signs, which is a creature from the earth which will 
speak to them with what they understand that the 
people did not believe My verses which were re¬ 
vealed to My Prophet. 

(jp O Messenger, remember the day I shall gath¬ 
er from each of the nations a group from amongst 
them the leaders who used to disbelieve in our 
ayaat, so they can precede their followers to the fire...the first group will be held until the last group of leaders are gath¬ 
ered and then they will be led to the reckoning. 

^ And their being led will continue until when they come to the place of their reckoning, Allah will say to them re- 
bukingly: “Did you deny my signs which proved my Oneness and which comprised my sacred law, whilst you did not 
have proper knowledge to judge them to be false and disbelieve in them, or what was it that you were doing: believing 
or denying?” 

(J) And the punishment will befall them due to their disbelieving in Allah and denying His ayahs. They will not speak to 
defend themselves due to their inability and the falsity of their proofs. 

As they used to deny the resurrection, Allah drew their attention to what proves it in their own lives, which is their sleep¬ 
ing that is like death and their waking up that is like the resurrection, and so He said: 

Ijp Do these deniers of the resurrection not see that I made the night so that they can rest in it through sleep, and I made 
the day bright for them so that they can see therein and then hasten towards their work? In that repeated death and the 
rising after it are proofs for the resurrection after death. 

@ O Messenger, remember: the day in which the angel appointed to blow the trumpet a second time will blow, then 
everyone in the heavens and everyone on earth will be terrified except whom Allah has excluded from being terrified, as 
a grace from Him. And all the creation of Allah will come to him on that day, in obedience and with humility. 

And you will see mountains on that day thinking them to be firm without moving, but they will in fact move like 
clouds move. It is the doing of Allah, for He is the one who makes them move. He is Aware of what you do. None of your 
actions are hidden from Him and He shall reward you for them. 

Beneficial Points: 

1. The importance of putting one’s trust in Allah. 2. The Prophet (peace be upon him) was commended by stating he was 
on the clear truth. 3. Placing guidance in the hearts is in Allah’s hands alone, not in the hands of the Messenger (peace 
be upon him). 4. Sleep is a sign and reminder for death and the awakening from sleep is a sign and reminder for the 
resurrection. 


^ ^ ,0 _' "o' ^ ^ ^ _ ,0 


<, * j 


an-Naml 



















^ ^ CU^^ A^~vjJ V ^Wo^J 

j ojl_Si \ d AlA jJ1p\ o' 0/5-' t^i($) ^JC^}^0> 

Oj-oiu^^' 0^-Q^' o' O^r^L? 

^£^33 \3\5 5^($> 

ui-uJ>t 5 l 

( ^ )OjuJo l^jj^io <j\j )La$ l^j^ygis «^Cb\£ j£o X^ 



Ki 




o y ^ 9 >£ ** *> 

^jJc\&\y<S* j(^) 0^-^' ' eLb^ tS^^JLllL 

^0>i$ l3^ \.^^j^>4j tsfj* ^ 05 

Ut^Ty I^Aa ' ^y*>z2 ' cj^C' ^-^j^y-t 

J^r& S-U^ ^jj-^iJ^^t 


an-Nami 


pF^P^ 385 


Part 20 


quite you for them.” 


© On the Day of Judgement, whoever brings faith 
and good deeds will gain paradise and will be safe 
from the horrors of that day due to Allah granting 
them that safety. 

© And whoever comes with disbelief and sins, 
for them will be the hellfire in which they will be 
thrown face first. It will be said to them by way 
of rebuke and humiliation: “Are you being requit¬ 
ed except for the disbelief and the sins you used to 
commit?” 

© O Messenger! Say to them: “I have only been 
commanded to worship the Lord of this city (Mak- 
kah) which He has sanctified, so no blood should 
be shed in it, nor should anyone be oppressed in it, 
nor should its game be hunted or trees cut. And to 
Him belongs the authority over everything. I have 
also been commanded to be from those who submit 
to Allah in obedience to Him.” 

© And I have been commanded to recite the 
Qur’an to people; whoever is guided by it and 
implements its teachings, his guidance will bene¬ 
fit him. But whoever deviates from its teachings, 
rejects them and does not implement them, say to 
him: “I am only one of the warners; I warn you of 
the punishment of Allah, and your guidance is not 
in my hands.” 

© Say - O Messenger: “All praise belongs to Allah 
for His innumerable blessings. He will show you 
His signs in the horizons and in yourselves; you 
will recognise them such that they will lead you to 
submitting to the truth. And your Lord is not ne¬ 
glectful of your actions; He is watching over them, 
none of them are hidden from Him and He will re- 


The Stories (Surah Al-Qasas) 


Themes of the Surah: 

Emphasis is made on the importance of setting true measures of strength and values, through the manifestation of the 
power of Allah and divine custom in helping the weak and destroying the arrogant. 

^ Explanation: 

© Ta Sin Mlm The discussion on similar letters has already passed in Surah Al-Baqarah. 

© These are the verses of a clear Qur’an. 

© We recite upon you with truth, the story of Moses and Pharoah for the peopleof faith as they are the ones who will 
take lessons and benefit from it. 

© Indeed Pharaoh ruled over Egypt, acting tyranically therein. He divided its people into groups and oppressing a certain 
group - which were the Children of Israel - killing their male children and letting the females live, to exploit and humiliate 
them. Indeed he was one who caused corruption on Earth through oppression, tyranny and arrogance. 

© And I wanted to bestow a favour upon the Israelites who had been oppressed by the Pharaoh in Egypt, by destroying 
their enemy, liberating them from the oppression, making them leaders, to be followed by those who seek the truth, and 
making them inheritors of Pharaoh’s kingdom in Egypt after I drowned him and his armies. 

Beneficial Points: 

1. Faith and good deeds are the means to achieving salvation from the horrors of the Day of Judgement. 

2. Disbelief and sins lead to entry into hellfire. 

3. It is forbidden to kill, oppress and hunt in the Haram sanctuary. 

4. Destruction is the ultimate outcome of the arrogant tyrants. 

5. Help of Allah and authority are the ultimate outcomes of the believers. 




























-tals 


_ - > i j 

jL^S/j<4 4_jsJ\S 

t*^ 1 ) . ?JL*.J* _Jv^jOA4 x^j_j\1_^*JCjo^^-^' 

I, «x #»• ^ ^ -£ ^ -£ 

j 0^^====^^ o' 

Jn 5 S \ JwA ^ 

^ij }J==k j^jjL &^==^ojo 

^l/s-^^|_9 I 4X-JIP s-A>^ ^SlyC^ p1^ai3 j yjst jfr ) 


4*JJ| 


jg} I wanted to grant them authority on the land 
of Egypt by making them dominate and rule over 
it, showing Pharaoh and his biggest supporters - 
Haman and their armies who helped them in their 
rule - what they feared most, which was the loss of 
their kingdom at the hands of a male child from the 
Israelites. 

After Allah mentioned the imminent outcome of 
the kingdom of Pharaoh and what He would honour 
Moses and his people with, He mentions the up¬ 
bringing of Moses until he was sent as a Messenger 
by Allah. He says, 

(JJJ) I inspired the mother of Moses (peace be upon 
him) to breastfeed him until she feared that Pharaoh 
and his people would kill him, and when that time 
came, to place him in a box, cast it into the sea and 
not fear him drowning, being harmed by Pharaoh or 
even having to separate from him, as I would return 
him to her alive and make him one of My Messen¬ 
gers I send to My creation. 

@ So she acted upon whatever I inspired her with, 
placing him in a box and casting it into the sea. The 
family of Pharaoh found him and took him in, so 
that Allah’s plan for Moses to become an enemy to 
Pharaoh by having his kingdom taken away from 
him and bringing him grief at his hands, comes to 
fruition. Indeed, Pharaoh, his minister Haman and 
their aides were sinful due to their disbelief, op¬ 
pression and corruption on Earth. 

{J} And when Pharaoh intended to kill him, his wife 
said to him: “This child could be a source of hap¬ 
piness for me and you; do not kill him, perhaps he 
will benefit is by serving us, or we could adopt him 
as our child.” They did not know how their kingdom would end at his hands. 

@ The heart of Moses’s mother forgot every worldly matter and became preoccupied with the matter of Moses, barely 
able to bear patience so much so that she almost expressed that it was her son, due to the immense attachment she had 
with him. It was only because of My strengthening her heart and granting her the ability to bear patience, that she became 
one of those believers who fully thrust their Lord and are patient upon what He decrees for them. 

@ And after she had cast him into the sea, Moses’s mother said to his sister, “Follow him so that you know what happens 
to him”, and so she observed him from a distance so that she was not implicated. Pharaoh and his people were not aware 
that she was his sister and that she was keeping an eye on him. 

@ By the decree of Allah, Moses refused to feed from the women. When his sister saw their eagerness to feed him, she 
said to them, “Shall I tell you of a household who shall feed him and look after him, who will also treat him with good¬ 
will?” 

@ So we returned Moses to his mother, for her eyes, after seeing what they longed for, called become joyful and rest, so 
that she would not be grieved by separation from him, and that she would realise the promise of Allah to return him to her 
to have been undoubtedly true. However, many people were unaware of this promise; no one knew she was his mother. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Allah decrees for His pious servants things which save them from the plots of their enemies. 

2. The plot of an oppressor leads to his own destruction. 

3. The strength of the affection of mothers towards their children is great. 

4. Taking precaution from enemies by hiding objectives and connections. 

5. Permissibility of using legal strategies to save oneself from the oppression of the oppressor. 

6. The promise of Allah will be fulfilled inevitably. 




















DJj+4 


i%\ 


£■ 3& - 

lyt ^yJzS' Cj^=y^ <j2>Oj( 

9 *''*' *** im ^^ 9 ^, ‘*\' a $ •s' f °“* 

3bj^=ajp<z<ij A^iCL^S I 

A? $ 99 y ** y^ _ ^ ^ ^ s' ^ ^ __ 

J-^j j&/4j\ \ 3 \i 

jAj\j4)jC- JLx$l \jjSS^ /J>^ j L2l«JgUg t j\p )/_\lS( ^ )(. , J^ 0 j 

Q j^ ^ =>\ La^O )3lS( ^ ) 




' > 


O' 

^ (J ^ AU> -X^eS \ \*a2>\ ,>^ A>- 

$ Ol^^^ O^-^^ 

\JJ ^ S '*•0 ✓ ^ '^'^» ^ '—' _ | 

(^ Oi^^ ^ ^ O^ U ^ I 


Al-Qasas 


Part 20 


After Allah mentioned the childhood of Moses, He 
then mentioned his youth, saying: 

@ When body and vigour grew stronger and 
peaked, completing the phase of youth, I granted 
him knowledge and understanding in religion. Just 
as I rewarded Moses for his obedience, likewise I 
reward those who do good in every era and place. 
@ Moses entered the city at a time when its in¬ 
habitants were unaware, and saw two men arguing 
and brawling. One was from the Israelites: Moses’s 
tribe, while the other was a Copt: Pharaoh’s people, 
who were Moses’s enemies. The one who was from 
the Israelites sought assistance from Moses against 
the Copt, so Moses struck him with a punch and 
because of his power, it killed him. Moses said, 
“This is from the adornment and deception of Sa¬ 
tan. Indeed, Satan is a deceiving enemy of whoever 
follows him; he is open in his enmity. Whatever has 
happened here is due to his enmity and deception; 
he wants me to err.” 

@ Beseeching his Lord and acknowledging his 
action, Moses said, “O my Lord! I have wronged 
myself by killing this Copt, so forgive my sin.” So 
Allah forgave him; indeed He Forgiving to whoev¬ 
er repents from His servants and merciful towards 
them. 

@ Moses said, “O my Lord! Due to your blessing 
me with the ability to repent, among other blessings, 
I shall never assist any criminal in their crime.” 

@ After the incident of killing the Copt, Moses 
awoke in the morning anxious as to what may 
happen. Suddenly, the very same person who had 


sought his aid and assistance against an enemy 
Copt the previous day, was now seeking his assistance against another Copt. Moses said to him, “Indeed, you are mis¬ 
guided and a clear inciter!” 

@) So when Moses (peace be upon him) intended to strike the Copt who was his and the caller’s enemy, the Copt said: 
“Do you intend to kill me just like you killed another yesterday? You only wish to become a tyrant on Earth by killing 
people and oppressing them; you have no desire to be one of those who reconcile between those who dispute!” 

@ A man came rushing from the far end of the city, fearing persecution against Moses. He said, “O Moses! Indeed, the 
leaders of the people of Pharaoh are holding counsel regarding your killing, so leave the city. I am one of those who wish 
well for you and I fear that they may seize and kill you.” 

@ So Moses acted according to the instruction of the well-wishing man and left the city in fear and anxiety over what 
may happen. He said, beseeching his Lord, “O my Lord! save me from the oppressive nation, so that they cannot harm 


® Beneficial Points: 

1. Acknowledging one’s sin is from the etiquettes of beseeching Allah. 

2. Praiseworthy gratitude is the gratitude that spurs a servant into obeying his Lord and distancing himself from His 
disobedience. 

3. The importance of hastening towards offering advice, especially if it means saving a believer from destruction. 

4. The obligation of adopting means to safety and seeking refuge in Allah through beseeching Him. 
























AA 




3j ^ 9 -^J^S i-Lils 3>^> 

105A ^ ^jj \l^j ^} (J^-^ 

J\i g\^jj j 05* 

^ hs. ^ ^ 

v^/rc^. ’-• 5 . ,rxi»»\sT\-ciit»-i 4 » 



ete~(§) o^Gl4^ 14.414 


V-> 


~JAj/^>C^j}j£>J^ <Ji\ -3J\c^ \$ 44^4—4 

j\i^J44S J44/ 0 ;U-l4£ 14 441414^ 

l4-4-4-4 ; J\j(^i rrLaAilfl)^ ,444 ^ j*c/t(!r 

cS\dsJ\S^J,\^2^l lb&£j*k 

I ^ y 2 I 

I tj^^pjjoAA £<j-4\ <^-^>-^44>^j\ 6\ 4 j (^) j 

zd^i&\ 



@ And when he walked heading towards Madyan, 
he said, “I hope in my Lord that He guides me to¬ 
wards the best path from which I do not stray.” 

{§} When he reached the waterhole of Madyan he 
found a group of people watering their livestock. 

He also found two women a little distance away, 
stopping their livestock from the water until the rest 
of the people finished. Moses asked them: “Why is 
it that you do not water your livestock along with 
the rest of the people?” They said to him, “It is our 
habit that we arrive but do not water until the shep¬ 
herds disperse, fearing mixing in with them. Our fa¬ 
ther is an aged man; he cannot water the livestock, 
so we are compelled to do it ourselves.” 

So he felt pity for them and watered their live¬ 
stock for them. He then took shelter in the shade 
and rested there, beseeching Allah and presenting 
his need to him, saying, “O my Lord! Indeed I am 
for any and every goodness you send down to me in 
dire need for and it is my only recourse.” 

@ When they went back, they informed their father 
of Moses, so he sent one of them to him, inviting 
him. She approached him walking modestly, say¬ 
ing, “Indeed, my father is inviting you to meet him, 
intending to reward you for watering our livestock 
for us.” When Moses came to their father and told 
him of his situation, he reassuringly told him, “Do 
not fear, for you have escaped from an oppressive 
nation: Pharaoh and his crowd. They have no au¬ 
thority over Madyan, so they will not be able to 
harm you.” 

{J} One of his two daughters said, “O my father! 

Hire him to shepherd our livestock for us, because 
he is worthy of being hired by you. He possesses strength and is trustworthy; through his strength he will be able to fulfil 
his responsibility, and with his trustworthiness he will safeguard whatever he is entrusted with.” 

Addressing Moses, their father said, “Indeed, I wish to marry you to one of these two daughters of mine, on the con¬ 
dition that their dowry is your shepherding our livestock for eight years. If you extend the period to ten years, it would 
be a favour on your part and not obligatory upon you, because the agreement is only for eight years, so whatever exceeds 
that is optional. I do not wish to impose upon you anything that would put you in difficulty; Allah-willing, you will find 
me one of the pious ones who fulfils their promises and doesnot break their agreements.” 

(jj§) Moses (peace be upon him) said, “The agreement between us is as we agreed; whichever of the two periods I work 
for you, eight years or ten, I would have fulfilled my end of the deal, so do not ask me for anything above that; Allah is a 
witness and a guardian over what we say. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Seeking refuge with Allah is the path to salvation in the world and afterlife. 

2. The modesty of a Muslim woman leads to her nobility and elevated rank. 

3. Their is no sin in the conversing of two unrelated people of the opposite gender as long as their is a need and the con¬ 
versation would not arise suspicion. 

4. The permissibility of a woman working if she is compelled to due to there being no one providing for her, provided 
there is no intermingling with males. 

5. Consulting daughters for their opinions and relying on them if their opinions are valid, is praiseworthy. 

6. Strength and trustworthiness are two qualities found within a successful employee. 

7. One should endeavour to remain chaste. 

8. It is permissible for dowry to be a service, as opposed to a tangible item. 


<^444 444^41 ollj Uj 

~W : 


Al-Qasas 



















[SSI ^ (S'ty*\^S-2 * 

S^Cj^ 1A^ JlS iA> jJ^\ 

4rL> 4jA \IS\gIo!^^? ^ 

| C^VjA-|3 G&\^3 Ills 0^($) 

3^i5jJ^i^ I 



\lju J4r ^.cJcS ij\C>3 J \S (^} C^f Xjj* \y l^=> j 
\ 3 VjGi o^ ^3 Vi^\S j 

o^.jSo J ^ -L> <j^ j 

{$) 5JL^s 


■ A ^ te&aiSfe, ^dl ojG4^^ k^rf @ So when Moses completed the agreed duration 

- either eight or ten years - and was returning with 
his family from Madyan to Egypt, he saw a fire to¬ 
wards the side of Mount Sinai. He said to his fam¬ 
ily, “Stay here. I have noticed a fire, perhaps I can 
bring some news to you from it, or a torch of fire 
with which we can light one for ourselves and get 
some warmth from the cold.” 

5j) So when Moses came to the fire which he had 
noticed, his Lord, may He be glorified, called out 
to him from the right of where Moses (peace be 
upon him) was standing, on the blessed spot near 
the tree: “O Moses! Indeed, I am Allah, the Lord 
of all creation. 

@ “And throw down your staff.” So Moses threw 
it down, fulfilling the command of his Lord. When 
he saw it move and slither as if it were a snake, he 
turned, fleeing in fear of it and did not return. His 
Lord then called him: “O Moses! Come forward 
and do not fear it, because you one of those who are 
safe from it and other things you may fear.” 

(jp “Enter your right hand into your shirt collar, it 
will turn white upon you taking it out without any 
ailment.” So Moses placed it into his collar and 
removed it, with it having turned white like snow, 
“and draw your arm to your side” so Moses pressed 
it against his side and his fear subsided. So these 
two things that have been mentioned: 
the staff and the hand, are two proofs sent from 
your Lord to Pharaoh and the leaders from his peo¬ 
ple. Indeed, they were a nation who left the obedi¬ 
ence of Allah by disbelief and sin. 

@ Moses said, pleading to his Lord, “Indeed, I 
have killed a man from amongst them: the Copt that a man from my tribe sought my help against, and so I fear that if I 
was to go to convey to them the message I have been sent with, they will kill me in return.” 

{§p And my brother Aaron speaks with more clarity than I do, so send him with me as my aide. I fear Pharaoh and his 
people will reject me, just as it is common for nations passed to reject the Messengers that were sent to them. 

@ Allah said in response to Moses’s supplication, “O Moses! I shall strengthen you by sending your brother with you 
as a Messenger and aide to you, and give you the upper hand over your enemy. They shall not be able to harm you with 
anything you dislike. By our ayaat (signs), you and those believers who follow you, will be victorious over Pharoah and 
his people.” 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Fulfilling promises and agreements are qualities of the believers. 

2. Allah spoke to Moses directly. 

3. A caller to Allah sometimes needs people who support him. 

4. Eloquence is important for those who invite to Allah. 

5. The truth always prevailing is a divine custom. 


















\S lLX$ 
($) icJL\£_ cSjLk* 

cy^^xJ>ljt jLAcl' ~ j; J iSj 

I j\j]\ *CaL&j^JQ j)^-sau 

^3iovi=^ 





@ When Moses (peace be upon him) brought My 
clear signs to them, they said, “This is nothing but 
a lie that Moses has fabricated; we have not heard 
anything like it from our forefathers. If it had been 
true, we would have heard something of the sort 
among the nations that have passed before us.” 

@ And Moses, addressing Pharaoh, said, “My 
Lord knows of the truthful one who has brought the 
guidance from Him, may He be glorified; He also 
knows who will face a praiseworthy outcome in 
the afterlife. The oppressors will never succeed in 
achieving their motives and acquiring safety from 
their fears.” 

{§} Addressing the leaders from his people, Pharaoh 
said, “O Leaders! I do not know of any deity for 
you except myself, so O Haman, bake some bricks 
and build a tall structure for me so that I can look at 
the deity of Moses and acquaint myself with Him. 

We believe Moses to be lying in his claim to have 
been sent as a Messenger for Allah, to me and my 
people.” 

jj) Pharaoh and his armies became arrogant and 
sought to remain dominant in Egypt without any 
right. They denied the resurrection and thought 
they would not return to Me on the Day of Judge¬ 
ment for accountability and requital. 

@ So I seized him and his armies, and threw them 
into the sea, destroying them by drowning them all. 

O Messenger! Ponder over what the outcome and 
ending of the oppressors was: it was destruction. 

@ I made Pharoah and his people leaders/prede¬ 
cessors for the tyrants and misguided after them, by 
spreading to their disbelief and misguidance they 
are calling to the fire. And on the of judgement, they will not be helped by being saved from the punishment; rather, the 
punishment will be multiplied for them because of the evil example of calling towards deviation they set. The conse¬ 
quences of their evil deeds and those of whoever followed them, shall be decreed against them. 

^ And I followed their punishment up with another, which was humiliation and exile in the worldly life. And then on the 
Day of Judgement they will be distanced from My mercy and detested by Me and My believing servants. 

@ Verily I gave Moses the Torah after I had sent My Messengers to the previous nations who were destroyed because 
they disbelieved. In this Torah were clear evidences and teachings showing people that which would benefit them and 
that which would lead to their harm. Therein was instruction towards goodness and mercy leading you to the good of 
both this world and the Hearafter. Perhaps then they would contemplate over the bounties of Allah upon them, showing 
gratitude and believing in Him. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Tyrants and oppressors have a habit of rejecting the truth with specious arguments. 

2. Oppression is a means to loss. 

3. Arrogance prevents following the truth. 

4. Ostentatious people suffering a bad outcome is from the customs of the Lord of the worlds. 

5. Falsehood has its leaders, callers, different guises and manifestations. 


jo <0 Jo-lOT 



































>4^oVS& 
txi Uto\ "SIj^ \2j 
J J^5 0^- 

I $ « 9 _ _ 


itL ' > 4t - 


] \ij Vj-^5 3}J^t ]y ^ J-r 1 0^ 


o^va 


*>. £ 


■ol 


| _jA^. ^^^^ 0 ^*-^xjLaJ 


Al-Qasas WS^-% 


Part 20 


@ O Messenger! You were not present on the west¬ 
ern side of the mountain from Moses’s perspective, 
when I completed the matter of sending Moses as a 
Messenger to Pharaoh and his people. You were not 
present to know of that incident so you could relate 
it to people, so what you do relate to them is only 
due to Allah’s revelation to you. 
jJS) However, I created nations and other creations 
after Moses and a long time passed due to which 
they forgot the covenants of Allah. You were not 
a resident of Madyan reciting My verses before 
them; but I sent you as a Messenger of My own 
accord and revealed the incident of Moses and his 
residing in Madyan to you, which you then related 
to the people. 

@ Neither were you present at the side of mount 
Sinai when I called out to Moses and revealed 
whatever I revealed to him, so that you could re¬ 
late that to the people either. Rather, I sent you as 
a mercy from your Lord to the people and revealed 
that incident to you, so that you could warn a nation 
to whom no Messenger had come prior to yourself, 
perhaps they would take heed and believe in what¬ 
ever was brought to them from Allah, may He be 
glorified. 

@ And if a divine punishment were to afflict them 
due to the sins and disbelief they were upon, they 
would have argued: “why did you not send a mes¬ 
senger to us, so we could have followed your ayaat 
and acted upon them, and have been from the true 
believers who follow your commandments. If it 
was not for that we would have hastened the pun¬ 
ishment. However, we delayed it so that we may be 


excused by sending a messenger to them.” 

(Sjjj) So when Muhammad came to them as a Messenger, they said: “Why has Muhammad not been given miracles proving 
his messengership, similar to what Moses was given in the Hand, Staff and the Torah which was revealed at once?” O 
Messenger! Say to them, refuting them: “Did the Jews not reject what Moses was given previously, and they said regard¬ 
ing the Torah and the Qur’an, “Both are sorcery, each supporting the other!” and they also said, “I reject both the Torah 
and the Qur’an!”? 

@ O Messenger! Say to these people: “If indeed you are truthful in your claim that the Torah and Qur’an are sorcery, 
bring a book revealed by Allah which is better in guidance than the two. If you bring forth one, I shall follow it.” 

(jp And if they do not take up your challenge to bring a book better guiding than the Torah and Qur’an, know for certain 
that their rejection of the two is not based on any proof; it is only a result of following their own desires. There is no one 
more deviant than the one who follows his desires without guidance from Allah, may He be glorified. Allah does not grant 
a nation who wrongs itself through disbelief in Allah, opposing His Messengers and countering the truth that comes to 
them from Allah with falsehood, the ability to be guided. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The messenger of Allah (peace be upon him) does not know the unseen (ghayb) except that which Allah has informed 
him of. 

2. Knowledge erodes over a long period of time. 

3. The people of falsehood have no legitimate excuse. 

4. The Jews disbelieved in the Torah and the Qur’an. 

5. The disbelievers are challenged with bringing forth anything which is better in guidance than the revelation of Allah 
to His Messengers. 

6. The disbelievers deviated due to following their desires, not due to following evidence. 



















@ I continuously conveyed to the idolaters and the 
Jews amongst the People of the Book the word re¬ 
garding the stories of the previous nations and the 
punishment I sent down on them when they denied 
My Messengers, in the hope that they will be re¬ 
minded by this and then believe, so that they are not 
afflicted by what afflicted them. 

Those who were firm in believing the Torah be¬ 
fore the Qur’an was revealed believe in the Qur’an, 
due to them finding it being informed of and de¬ 
scribed in their books. 

When it is recited to them they say: “We believe 
it is the truth in which there is no doubt and which 
is revealed from our Lord. We were Muslims before 
this Qur’an was revealed, due to our faith in what 
the Messengers before him brought”. 

@ Those who have been described as mentioned 
will be given the reward of their actions by Allah 
twice, due to their persevering in faith in their own 
book and due to their faith in Muhammad (peace be 
upon him) when he was sent. They repel through 
the good of their righteous actions the sins they 
earned, and from what I have provided them they 
spend in the avenues of good. 

When these believers hear any false speech 
from the People of the Book, they turn away from it 
without paying attention it, and they say addressing 
those who say such: “For us is the reward of our 
actions and for you is the reward of your actions. 

You are safe from us swearing and causing harm. I 
do not seek to accompany ignorant people, due to 
the damage and harm it contains for one’s religion 
and worldly life”. 

O Messenger, you do not guide whomever you love, such as Abu Talib and others, by enabling him to bring faith, but 
rather Allah alone is the one who enables whomever He wants to be guided. And He knows better regarding whom it has 
already passed in His knowledge that he will be amongst those guided to the straight path. 

@ The idolaters amongst the people of Makkah said, excusing themselves from following Islam and bringing faith in it: 
“If we follow this Islam which you brought, our enemies will quickly snatch us from our land”. Did I not establish these 
idolaters in a safe sanctuary in which bloodshed and oppression are unlawful, and in which they are safe from others 
attacking them, with fruits of everything being brought to them as sustenance from Me which I draw towards them?” 
However, most of them do not know what Allah has blessed them with that they should be grateful to Him. 

@> And how many a city were there which were ungrateful for Allah’s blessings on them, then they exceeded the bounds 
in sins and disobedience, so I sent a punishment to them and destroyed them through it. So these are their dwellings in 
ruins, with people passing by them. They were not inhabited after those who lived in them, except for a few travellers. 
And it is I who will inherit the heavens, the earth and everyone in them. 

(j§) O Messenger, your Lord did not destroy the cities until he had given opportunity to their inhabitants by sending Mes¬ 
sengers to their main cities, just as He sent you to the Mother of Cities. And I was not one to destroy the people of the 
cities when they were firm on the truth. I only destroy them when they are unjust through disbelief and committing sins. 

Beneficial Points: 

1. There is virtue for a person from the People of the Book who brings faith on Muhammad (peace be upon him) and he 
is rewarded twice. 

2. Enabling a person to accept guidance is in Allah’s hands, not in the hands of anyone else such as Messengers and 
others. 

3. Following the truth is a means of peace, not a cause for fear as the idolaters claim. 

4. Extravagance is dangerous for the individual and society. 

5. It is from Allah’s mercy that He does not destroy people except after giving them an opportunity by sending Messen¬ 
gers. 






o#$) * |5 

3 )\jLq. 9 






Al-Qasas 




















When the idolaters made excuses from following 
the truth, due to the difficulties encountered, such 
as the turmoil of war and cutting off of trade, Allah 
answered them by saying: 

@ Whatever your Lord has given you, it is of what 
you enjoy and adorn yourselves with in this worldly 
life, then it will finish. And the great reward which 
is with Allah in the afterlife is better and more 
lasting than the enjoyment and adornment in this 
world. Do you not understand that so that you pre¬ 
fer what is everlasting over what is going to finish? 
@ Is the one I have promised paradise in the after¬ 
life and the everlasting pleasure it contains like the 
one I have given wealth and adornment to enjoy 
in the worldly life, then he will be on the day of 
judgment amongst those who will be presented to 
the fire of hell? 

On the day their Lord will call them saying: 
“Where are My partners you used to worship be¬ 
sides me and whom you claimed were My part¬ 
ners?” 

@ The callers towards disbelief for whom the pun¬ 
ishment will become binding will say: “Our Lord, 
these are the ones I misguided just as I became mis¬ 
guided. I disassociate ourselves from them to You. 
They never used to worship us, but they only used 
to worship the satans”. 

@ It will be said to them: “Call upon your partners 
so they can save you from the disgrace you are in”. 
They will then call their partners, but they will not 
respond to their call, and they will see the punish¬ 
ment prepared for them. If they had been amongst 
those guided to the truth, they would not have fallen 


into the punishment. 

On the day their Lord will call them saying: “What answer did you give My Messengers I sent to you?” 

@) So that which they can argue with will become hidden to them and they will not mention anything. They will not ask 
one another, due to the frightening shock they will be in, because they will know for sure they are heading towards the 
punishment. 

@ As for one amongst these idolaters who repents from his disbelief, brings faith in Allah and His Messengers, and does 
good actions, perhaps he will be amongst those who are successful in attaining what they seek and who are saved from 
what they fear. 

@ O Messenger, your Lord creates what He wishes to create, and He chooses whoever he wants for His obedience and 
prophethood. The idolaters have no choice that they should object to Allah. Pure and holy is Allah from the partners they 
worship with Him. 

@ And your Lord knows what their chests hide and make apparent. Nothing of this is hidden from Him and He shall 
reward them for it. 

jJS) And He is Allah besides whom there is no true deity. For Him alone is praise in this world and for Him is praise in the 
afterlife. For Him is the decree which is implemented and which nothing can repel. And to Him alone you will be returned 
on the day of judgment for reckoning and recompense. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The intelligent person is one who prefers the everlasting over the finite. 

2. The oppressors will disassociate themselves from one another on the day of judgment. 

3. Repentance cancels everything before it. 

4. The choice lies with Allah, not with His servants, so His servants have no right to object to Him. 

5. Allah’s knowledge encompasses whatever is apparent and hidden from the actions of His servants. 















■J>J 


9 




v&l 


@ Say - O Messenger, to these idolaters: Tell me if 
Allah were to make the light last continuously for 
you, without any break until the Day of Judgment, 
which Allah besides Allah can bring you light like 
that of day? Do you not hear these proofs and know 
that there is no Allah besides Allah who can bring 
that to you? 

(Sj) O Messenger! Say to them: Tell me if Allah were 
to make the day last continuously for you until the 
Day of Judgment, which Allah besides Allah can 
bring you night in which you can rest to be relieved 
of the tiredness of working in the day? Do you not 
see these signs and know that there is no Allah be¬ 
sides Allah who can bring any of that to you? 

(jjj) And it is from His mercy, O people, that He has 
made the night dark for you, so you can rest in it 
after you have become tired through working in the 
day, and He has made the day bright for you, so you 
can strive to earn sustenance in it, and so that you 
can be grateful for Allah’s blessings on you and not 
be ungrateful for them. 

jjj) On the day their Lord will call them saying: 

“Where are My partners you used to worship be¬ 
sides Me and claim they are My partners?” 

I shall bring from every nation its prophet to 
testify against them their disbelief and denial, then 
I will say to these nations: “Bring your proofs and 
evidences for the disbelief and denial you were 
in”. So their pretexts will run out and they will be 
convinced that the truth in which there is no doubt 
is for Allah, and the partners they used to invent for 
Him will disappear from him. 

After Allah mentioned that Pharaoh exalted himself 
on earth due to authority, He mentioned the transgression of Qarun due to wealth, saying: 

@ Qarun was from the people of Moses (peace be upon him), but he was arrogant over them. And I granted him such 
treasures of wealth, that the keys to his treasuries would be heavy to carry for even a strong group. When his people said 
to him: “Do not rejoice arrogantly, for Allah does not love those who rejoice arrogantly, but rather he despises them and 
will punish them for that. 

@ And seek by the wealth Allah has given you the reward of the abode of the afterlife, by spending it in avenues of good. 
Do not forget your share of food, drink, clothes, and so forth amongst the blessings, without excessiveness or pride. And 
deal well with your Lord and with His servants, just as Allah has been good to you. Do not seek corruption on earth by 
committing sins and leaving obedience. Allah does not love those who cause corruption on earth through that. In fact, he 
despises them”. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The succession of day and night is one of the blessings of Allah for which one must thank Him. 

2. The night is for rest and the day is for work. 

3. Transgression can be due to wealth, just as it can be through leadership and kingdom. 

4. Wealth is a blessing, but it can turn into an affliction if it is not utilised in what pleases Allah. 

5. Rejoicing arrogantly is a sin which Allah hates. 

6. It is important to sincerely advise a person whom we fear will be tempted. 

7. Allah dislikes those who cause corruption on earth. 


a^IX 1 ^3i 
-==^<X, 

A^ 

OW ^Jj^======^ \ A^<iX I 























i Saxp ( Sc : ^ j nS^ J\| 

Vjcs^J\£==s\j dj$ <^50 


eUgnc)\ (1) 3A)_^^J^^LjlS^A^JO 3t I 

Ijj \yS3 <ju5 \ (^) \ ol^===Laj 4>i\ 

**~ ±*£_ ^ ^ ^ ^-g. 

U^-*5r o_s->^y jj \ \ 

d*5$$& 6j3oJ>S! d^ 

Qbj^\j\^(A \^^<\}^<y$\^yk 


Part 20 


]^B[ 


jg} Qarun said: “I have only been given this wealth 
because of the knowledge and power I have, so I 
am deserving of that”. Did Qarun not know that 
Allah had destroyed nations before him who were 
stronger and who had gathered more wealth? But 
there power or wealth did not benefit them. On the 
Day of Judgment, the wrongdoers will not be in¬ 
terrogated about their sins due to Allah’s complete 
knowledge of them and any questioning they will 
face is for reprimand and censure. 

@ Qarun came out in his adornment, showing off 
his wealth and status. Those amongst Qarun’s com¬ 
panions who were desirous of the adornment of the 
worldly life said: “If only we were given worldly 
adornment like Qarun has been given. Indeed he 
has been given a great share of everything!”. 

(Sf§5 Those given knowledge said when they saw 
Qarun in his adornment and when they heard what 
his companions wished for: “Woe unto you! The 
reward of Allah in the afterlife and the pleasure He 
has prepared for those who bring faith and do good 
deeds is better than the worldly splendour given to 
Qarun”. And none are granted the ability to say this 
statement and act accordingly except the patient 
who persevere in preferring the reward with Allah 
over the temporary enjoyment of this world. 

@ Then I made the earth swallow him and his 
house, along with all in it, in retribution for his 
transgression. He had no group to help him against 
Allah nor was he amongst those who can help 
themselves. 

@ Those who wished for the wealth and adorn¬ 
ment he had before being swallowed up began say- 


BffiS j Al-Qasas 

ing heedfully: “Did we not know that Allah extends sustenance for whom He wishes amongst His servants and restricts it 
for whomever He wishes amongst them? Had Allah not favoured us by not punishing us for what we said, He would have 
made the earth swallow us as He did with Qarun. The disbelievers are not successful, neither in this life or the afterlife, 
but rather their return and outcome is loss in both”. 

@ That is the abode of the afterlife which I shall make an abode of pleasure and honour for those who do not seek to 
be arrogant on earth by turning away from faith in the truth and its followers, nor do they want corruption in it. And the 
praiseworthy outcome, in the form of the enjoyment of paradise and the pleasure of Allah therein, is for those who are 
mindful of their Lord by carrying out His commands and refraining from His prohibitions. 

@ Whoever brings a good deed on the Day of Judgment, such as prayer, Zakat, fasting and so forth, for him is a good 
reward for that good deed, where the good deed will be multiplied to ten the like thereof. And whoever brings a bad deed 
on the Day of Judgment, such as disbelief, consuming interest, adultery and so forth, then those who did bad deeds will 
not be rewarded except as much as they did, without any increase. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Every good and blessing in man is from the creation and decree of Allah. 

2. It is necessary upon the intelligent human to take heed from the conditions of those before him. 

3. The people of worldly pursuits are the quickest to be deceived by it and to fall into temptation. 

4. The people of knowledge are the people of wisdom and salvation from temptations, because knowledge directs a per¬ 
son toward what is correct. 

5. The outcome of haughtiness and arrogance on earth and spreading corruption is destruction and loss. 

6. The vastness of Allah’s mercy and His justice is through multiplying good deeds for the believer and not multiplying 
bad deeds for the disbeliever. 















(Sfp The One who revealed the Qur’an to you and 
made it compulsory upon you to convey it and act 
upon it is going to return you to Makkah victori¬ 
ously. O Messenger, say to the idolaters: “My Lord 
knows best who has brought guidance and who is 
clearly astray from guidance and truth”. 

@ O Messenger, you did not expect, before 
prophethood, that the Qur’an would be revealed to 
you, as revelation from Allah. However, His mercy 
required it to be revealed to you, so do not be a 
helper to the disbelievers in the misguidance they 
are upon. 

(jp These idolaters should not turn you away from 
the verses of Allah after they have been revealed 
to you, making you leave reciting and conveying 
them. And call people towards faith in Allah, de¬ 
claring His Oneness, and acting on His sacred law. 
And do not become from the idolaters who worship 
others besides Allah, but rather be from those who 
declare Allah’s Oneness and only worship Allah 
alone. 

I And do not worship alongside Allah any Allah 
besides Him. There is no true Allah besides Him. 
Everything will perish besides His Face. For Him 
alone is the judgment; He judges as He wishes. And 
to Him alone you will be returned on the day of 
judgment to be reckoned and rewarded. 


js AsX* 


3 $ 








(^) Cjyy -C^==ii \ 

\J>r -> S* j y* (£) \ j c)\ 




The Spider (Surah Al-Ankabut) 

® Themes of the Surah: 

This surah focuses on steadfastness and patience 
during affliction and trials, and its outcome. 

® Explanation: 

(p) Alif Lam Meem. The discussion on similar letters has already passed at the beginning of Surah Al-Baqarah. 

Cp Did the people think that by saying: “I brought faith in Allah”, they will be left without any test to clarify the reality 
of what they said: are they true believers? The matter is not as they thought. 

I tested those before them, so Allah will make clear and disclose to you the truth of those who were true in their faith 
and the lie of those who were dishonest therein. 

(jjj) Or did those who commit sins such as idolatry and so forth think they will escape us and be saved from My punish¬ 
ment? Bad is the judgment they make, for they will not be able to make Allah powerless nor will they be saved from His 
punishment if they die on their disbelief. 

Cjl) Whoever is hopeful of meeting Allah on the day of judgment so He can reward him should know that the time Allah 
has appointed for that is coming soon. And He is Hearing of the statements of His servants, Knowing of their actions. 
Nothing of their actions are hidden from Him and He shall reward them accordingly. 

© And whoever exerts himself by motivating it to guidance and staying far from disobedience, and whoever strives in 
the way of Allah, he is only doing so for his own benefit. Allah is Self-Sufficient and in no need of all the creation. Their 
obedience does not increase Him nor does their disobedience decrease Him. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Helping the people of misguidance is forbidden. 

2. Holding firm to the Oneness of Allah and staying far from idolatry have been commanded. 

3. Afflicting the believers and testing them is Allah’s custom. 

4. Allah is Self sufficient, not in need and does not take benefit from the obedience of His servants. 






























fo f 


<^15 ^ji \j* kJi ^ A-^br oL? 

j ( ^ j>si~o l^^ 3 c>v> f 1 i 1144 s ^ 

oj>4^l^ 

(J£c5i2 4^\j 1 Lj^\ g.QjL> ^ 

£>^LJc!)jJ '*^->-Cj^_j 4 )k\ aa£$ 

^ 0^-2^ 

^^(2)5>-^1^(3^ 

AX_^ cjd ^^^culs (j^\ c L>-y \jl^Zjj\ x2j($) 

JslX^AS !_ 



(0) Those who brought faith and were patient on 
our testing them, and who did good actions, I shall 
wipe out their sins due to the good actions they did, 
and I shall reward them in the afterlife with the best 
of what they used to do in this world. 

@ And I enjoined upon humankind that they be 
righteous and good with their parents. O man, if 
your parents force you to associate with Me that 
whose association you have no knowledge of - as 
occurred with Sa’d ibn Abi Waqqas from his moth¬ 
er - do not obey them in that, because there is no 
obedience to the creation in disobedience to the 
Creator. To Me alone is your return on the Day of 
Judgment, then I shall inform you of what you used 
to do in the world and I shall reward you for it. 
© And those who brought faith and did good ac¬ 
tions, I shall enter them on the day of judgment 
amongst the righteous, thus I will raise them with 
them and grant them their reward. 

(@) Amongst people is he who says: “I brought faith 
in Allah”. But when the disbelievers afflict him 
with harm due to his faith, he considers their tor¬ 
ture the punishment of Allah, hence he renounces 
faith to conform with the disbelievers. And if you 
achieve help from your Lord, O Messenger, they 
will say: “We are with you in faith, O believers”. 
Does Allah not know best what is in the hearts of 
people, nothing of disbelief and faith they contain 
being hidden from Him? So how do you inform Al¬ 
lah of what is in their hearts when He knows better 
than them what they contain? 

@ And surely Allah will make clear to His serv¬ 
ants those who truly brought faith and He will make 


clear those who display faith but hide disbelief. 

@ And the disbelievers said to those who brought faith in Allah alone: “Follow our religion and what we are on, and we 
will carry your sins for you and we take responsibility for them”. They will not carry any of their sins, and they are lying 
in this statement of theirs. 

As it may be understood through negating their lifting the sins of others that the disbelievers who call towards their mis¬ 
guidance will not incur any extra sin due to that, this ambiguity was lifted by His saying: 

@ And I shall burden these idolaters who call towards their falsehood with the sins they committed and I shall burden 
them with the sins of those who followed their call, without any of the sins of their followers being decreased. And they 
will be questioned on the day of judgment regarding the falsehood they used to invent in this world. 

And I sent Noah as a Messenger to his people, then he stayed amongst them for a period of nine hundred and fifty 
years, calling them to the Oneness of Allah. But they denied him and remained on their disbelief, so the flood seized them 
whilst they were wrongdoers due to their disbelief in Allah and their denial of the Messengers, thus they were destroyed 
through drowning. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Allah wipes out sins through good deeds. 

2. The emphasis on the obligation of being kind to one’s parents. 

3. Obedience to Allah comes before obedience to one’s parents. 

4. Faith in Allah demands patience upon being harmed in His way. 

5. Whoever establishes a bad practice, on him is its burden and the burden of those who practice it, without any of their 
burden decreasing. 





















\ <^S>C^y&\j A^L^\3 

I JLisssd'S ijp&)j4&\\j 3J^4wAj^, Jls 

*-^(^) O^rLx) 

li^o CA^ ^ l)\ 4$C)ji 

Lhy)\ 4^\ Xj^}J^\i db jj^> 5^4==^^^ oj j 
l^^SO lJ^ 9 (ffi LU*^-y ^\ 7 ^ \ gli====3J^\ 9 a slllpVq 

I ^IS 

Ijl fe-)Z^<JCL+± 


@ So I saved Noah and the believers with him in 
the ark from being destroyed through drowning, 
and I made the ark a sign for people to take heed 
from. 

@ O Messenger, remember the story of Abraham 
when he said to his people: “Worship Allah alone, 
and fear His punishment by carrying out His com¬ 
mands and refraining from His prohibitions. That 
which is being ordered that is better for you if you 
really want to know what is better for you. 

@ O idolaters, you are only worshipping idols 
which do not benefit or harm, and you are inventing 
a lie when you claim they are worthy of worship. 

Those whom you worship besides Allah do not 
have the ability to provide for you that they should 
provide you. Seek provision from Allah alone, as 
He is the Provider, worship Him alone, and thank 
Him for the provision He has blessed you with. 

To Him alone you will be returned on the day of 
judgment to be reckoned and rewarded, not to Your 
idols”. 

O idolaters, if you deny what Muhammad 
(peace be upon him) brought, then nations before 
you also denied, such as the nation of Noah, and 
Aad and Thamud. It is only upon the Messenger to 
clearly convey, and he has conveyed what his Lord 
ordered him to convey to you. 

Do these deniers not see how Allah created the 
creation initially, then He shall restore it after it has 
finished? This is easy for Allah, as He is Powerful 
with nothing is beyond His ability. 

@ O Messenger, say to these deniers of the res¬ 
urrection: “Travel through the land and think how 
Allah began the creation. Then Allah will restore people after their death to the second life for the resurrection and 
reckoning. Allah is Powerful over everything; nothing is outside His ability, so He is able to resurrect people just as He 
created them in the first place”. 

(jp He punishes whom He wishes from His creation through His justice, and He has mercy on whom He wishes amongst 
His creation through His grace. 

@ You are not going to escape your Lord, nor can you flee from His punishment on earth or in the heavens. You do not 
have besides Allah any helper to take care of your affairs nor do you have any assistant to lift His punishment from you. 
(j|p Those who disbelieved in the verses of Allah and meeting Him on the Day of Judgment, those have lost hope in My 
mercy, so they will never enter paradise due to their disbelief, and those will have a painful punishment that will await 
them in the afterlife. 

^ Beneficial Points: 

1. Idols do not have the ability to provide, so they do not deserve worship. 

2. Provision is only to be sought from Allah who possesses the power to provide. 

3. The beginning of creation is a proof to the resurrection. 

4. Entering paradise is forbidden for one who dies in his disbelief. 


c La 9 ( Q (V° 

oi 2 (jtj^==& ^ ^ i*y_j \ 


Al-Ankabut 


398 























£)\ ^ \z^jajp <^\jPT' iS^ 

^ i^ris 

>^=c3o o 55 ^ C*i33\ Lo\ t J\fj( ^ i | 

[S5 cJ l_3_^ ^21-^ ^2-3'- (^) >^ll-^r>^^ > 0^^--^====?J 

A2>j33 ^L9 

4^fc5i\ 44^-1 

^ <3 

J^4 n^\^>y\^, ^L=4 

0 &&^ ^ ci^Jibj 

^ ^ C v- ^ ^ <v_d A_x) \j2L2>\ l_3 ^ \ 2 A- 5 jj 9 

($) 4l3 (^) o^ap>^ ^ 


{j5 The only answer Abraham’s people gave to 
him - after he had instructed them to worship Allah 
alone and to give up the worship of idols - was that 
they said: Kill him or throw him into the fire in de¬ 
fence of your Allahs. But Allah saved him from the 
Fire. In his being saved from the fire after having 
been thrown into it there truly are lessons for peo¬ 
ple who have faith, because they are the one who 
benefit from such lessons. 

(Sjj) Abraham (peace be upon him) said to his peo¬ 
ple: You have only taken idols as Allahs whom you 
worship for your mutual recognition and affection 
for their worship in the present life. Then, on the 
Day of Judgement, this mutual affection between 
you will end and you will disown and curse one 
another when you see the punishment. The fire will 
be the place you resort to and no one will help and 
protect you against Allah’s punishment, not the 
idols that you used to worship besides Allah and 
nor anyone else. 

(Sjj) Lot (peace be upon him) believed in him and 
Abraham said: I will emigrate to my Lord, to the 
blessed land of Levant. He is the Mighty that can¬ 
not be challenged and the one who migrates to Him 
will never be humiliated. He is the Wise in His 
planning and estimation. 

(Sjj I gave Abraham Isaac and his son, Jacob. I 
placed prophethood and revealed scriptures from 
Allah among his offspring. I gave him the rewards 
of his steadfastness on the truth in this world, and in 
the life to come he will be given the reward of the 
righteous. What he was given in the world will not 
reduce the noble reward that has been prepared for 


him in the afterlife. 

(j§) O Messenger, remember the story of Lot when he said to his people: You are committing a terrible sin that was not 
perpetrated before you by anyone in the whole world. You are the first to innovate this sin that goes against the sound 
nature of man. 

@ Do you approach men from their backsides to satisfy your lust, cut off the way for travellers who cannot pass by you 
for fear of the obscene sin that you perpetrate, commit evil acts in your gatherings such as nudity and harm those who 
pass by with words and actions? But the only response from his people after he prohibited them from doing evil acts 
was that they said to him: Bring upon us Allah’s punishment that you threaten us with, if you are truthful in your claim, 
(jp) Lot (peace be upon him) prayed to His Lord after his people were obstinate and had disparagingly demanded that 
the punishment be sent down on them: O my Lord! Help me against these people who spread corruption on earth by the 
disbelief and shameful sins that they promulgate. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Allah’s care for His righteous servants as He saves them from the plot of their enemies. 

2. The friendship of disbelievers will be severed in the afterlife and will turn into enmity. 

3. The virtue of migration to Allah. 

4. The greatness of the rank of Abraham and his family in Allah’s sight. 

5. Our prophet (peace be upon him) was definitely from the progeny of Abraham. 

6. Being given some reward in the world does not mean the reward in the afterlife will be diminished. 

7. The obscene act of homosexuality is one of the major sins. 

8. The evil of committing wrong acts in public gatherings. 
















i&'l 




^I^Uiju;3i^^3\s 

»^a3V^\ Vj^La^j 
Si jij^zsd \1\^Jj 

j t^ y~^i) 

** ^^VI^3L^\2l^===^3 ^.j43^$J 

L^cfe$> 




L?Xu***d2j 


'^}J>C^2> Ajj^}\ JL&iX^{l 0^-XA=5 (J$) 
^ j^ 3 j\ ^^ j($) 


fr 


(S§p When the angels whom I had sent came to give 
good news to Abraham of Isaac and after him his 
son, Jacob, they said to him: We are going to de¬ 
stroy the people of the town of Sodom, the town 
of the people of Lot. Its people were wrongdoers 
because of the obscene act that they were doing. 

(S§p Abraham (peace be upon him) said to the an¬ 
gels: But Lot is in that town whose people you wish 
to destroy and he is not one of the wrongdoers. The 
angels said: I know very well who is there. I will 
save him and his household from the destruction 
that will be sent down on the people of the town, 
except for his wife. She will be one of those who 
will be left behind, and we will destroy her with the 
rest of them. 

@ When the angels whom I sent to destroy the 
people of Lot came to Lot, he was troubled and dis¬ 
tressed by their coming, fearing for them the evil 
of his people, as the Messengers had come to him 
in the form of men and his people lusted after men 
instead of women. The angels said to him: Do not 
fear, for your people will not be able to harm you 
and do not grieve over the news of their destruction 
that I give you. I will certainly save you and your 
household from destruction, except for your wife. 

She will be one of those who will be left behind, 
and we will destroy her with the rest of them. 

(jp I will send a punishment from the sky down on 
the people of this town that used to do obscene acts, 
which is stones of baked clay, as a punishment for 
their leaving out following Allah by the perpetra¬ 
tion of that evil and immoral act, which was satis¬ 
faction of lust with men instead of women. 

(jP I left some of this town that I destroyed as a clear sign for those who use their intellect for sound reasoning, because 
they are the ones who take a lesson from the signs. 

tf) I sent to the people of Madyan their brother in lineage, Shu‘ayb (peace be upon him). He said: My people, worship 
Allah alone, and have hope by your worshipping Him for reward on the Last Day. Do not spread corruption on earth by 
committing and spreading sins. 

(jp His people rejected him and so the earthquake struck them. When morning came, they were laying dead in their 
homes, and they were motionless. 

(j§P I also destroyed the tribe of 4 Ad, the people of Hud, and the Thamud, the people of Salih. Signs of their destruction are 
clear to you - O people of Makkah - by what is left of their dwelling by Hijr (towards the Levant) and Shihr (near Hadra- 
mut). Their empty dwellings are evidence of that. Satan made their deeds of disbelief and other sins seem good to them 
and diverted them from the right path. They were capable of seeing truth from deviation and guidance from misguidance 
as their Messengers had taught them, but they chose to follow their desires instead of following guidance. 

Beneficial Points: 

1. Oppression is a means that leads to destruction. 

2. Following the truth is a means that leads to salvation from destruction. 

3. Human relations are only of benefit if they are accompanied by faith. 

4. Concern for the safety and security of guests from being assaulted. 

5. The homes of those who were destroyed by the punishment is a lesson for those who wish to take lesson. 

6. Knowing the truth is of no benefit when one follows his desires and gives preference to it over guidance. 



















y* OJj-2j 



^a 3 Jot) Jj^\ "> Ll"-=r3 



oo*v,3dir 
o^U\ && o^\^>J S&^g o jSt 

ly^U^==3 



@> I destroyed Qarun when he oppressed the people 
of Moses, by sinking him together with his property 
into the ground. I destroyed Pharaoh and his min¬ 
ister, Haman, by drowning them in the sea. Moses 
had brought them clear miracles indicating his truth¬ 
fulness, but they behaved arrogantly in the land of 
Egypt and were too proud to have faith in him. They 
could not be saved from My punishment by escap¬ 
ing from Me. 

@ So I seized each one of those mentioned above 
with My destructive punishment. Amongst them 
were the people of Lot on whom I sent down stones 
of baked clay. Amongst them were the people of Sa¬ 
lih and the people of Shuaib who were overcome 
by a sudden blast. Amongst them was Qarun whom 
I sunk into the earth together with his property. 
Amongst them were the people of Noah and Pharaoh 
and Haman whom I destroyed by drowning. It was 
not Allah who wronged them by destroying them for 
no sin; but they wronged themselves by committing 
sin and thus were deserving of the punishment. 

@ The example of the idolaters who took idols 
whom they worshipped other than Allah in the hope 
that they will benefit them or intercede for them is 
like that of a spider that builds a house to protect it 
from heat and cold and from an assault against it. 
The frailest of all houses is the spider’s as it does not 
ward off any cold nor prevent any heat. Similarly, 
their idols will not benefit nor harm nor intercede. If 
the idolaters knew that, they would not have taken 
idols that they worship besides Allah. 

@ Allah, may He be glorified, knows what they 
worship besides Him. Nothing of that is hidden from 
Him. He is the Mighty Who cannot be challenged and the Wise in His creation, estimation and planning. 

@ These examples that I draw for people, to awaken them and make them see the truth and guide them to it, can only be 
grasped in the desired manner by those who have knowledge of Allah’s law and rule. 

Allah, may He be glorified, created the heavens and He created the earth with truth. He did not create them with 
falsehood and He did not create them in vain. In that creation there is clear indication of Allah’s Power for those who 
have faith, because they are the ones who will use Allah’s creation as evidence for the Creator, may He be glorified. 
The disbelievers however pass by the signs in the horizons and the signs within themselves without their attention being 
drawn to the greatness and power of the Creator, may He be glorified. 

<SjS) Read - O Messenger - to people what Allah has revealed to you of the Qur’an and do the prayer in the most perfect 
manner. Prayer that is discharged perfectly restrains the doer from falling into sins and wrong, because it creates a light 
in the heart that prevents the perpetration of sins and guides the person to doing righteous deeds. The remembrance of 
Allah is greater than and superior to every thing. Allah knows everything you are doing. None of your actions are hidden 
from him and He will recompense you for them. If they are good the recompense will be good and if they are evil the 
recompense will be evil. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The various forms of punishment in the world. 

2. Allah is free of committing oppression. 

3. Attaching oneself to other than Allah is to attach oneself to the weakest means. 

4. The virtue of knowledge. 

5. The importance of prayer in setting right the behaviour of a believer. 

6. The virtue of the remembrance of Allah. 







Al-Ankabut 


Part 20 



















. jfSz&M 

i*Y 




j «• >-4^3^-^ <jdj^ 

5^UJ^4^1>-5. '^==^\jC^\3 ^i=4i j 


j q^I^LE^ C^~^= ] C^J (^) Ojj a ^—= 3 \ | 

4jLj3^ 

j })\sj0^jMi^^^j^&y)J\\jj\ | 

j d\ikASJjj 33 j 3 > T>\ (^L •*• A-r° yjolS 3 j 

?^=4J 2d_>^ C^H^==sf 

± ^= c~£>j (^h. 4&\j , Js (^) 

« 

j (^) \ jLJfc < 3 -^^ V? 


@ O believers! Do not discuss and debate with 
the Jews and Christians to whom the divine books 
were revealed, except in the best of manners and 
most exemplary of ways: inviting them by exhor¬ 
tation and establishing clear proofs. As for those of 
them who oppress by showing stubbornness and 
arrogance, fight them until they submit, or pay the 
Jizyah with their own hands while subdued. And 
say to the Jews and the Christians: “I have believed 
in whatever Allah has revealed to us in the Qur’an, 
and in the Torah and Gospel that was revealed to 
you. Our Lord is one and so is yours, He has no 
partner in His lordship, worship or perfection, and 
we submit and humble ourselves to Him alone.” 

@ And just as I revealed the Books upon those 
before you, I revealed the Qur’an upon you. Some 
of those who read the Torah, such as Abdullah ibn 
as Salam believe in the Qur’an as well, because of 
what they find of its description in their books. And 
from among the idolaters are also those who be¬ 
lieve in this Qur’an. Only those who are habituated 
to rejection and denial disbelieve in My signs, de¬ 
spite their clarity. 

(Sjp O Messenger! You never read any book before 
the Qur’an, nor did you write anything with your 
hand because you are unlettered and cannot read 
or write. Had you been able to read and write, the 
ignorant people would have doubted your messen- 
gership and used it as an excuse to say you were 
relating from the previous Books. 

Nay, the Qur’an that has been revealed to you 
consists of clear verses which are preserved with¬ 
in the hearts of those believers granted knowledge. 

Only those who wrong themselves by ascribing partners with Allah and rejecting Him, deny My verses. 

(j§) The idolaters said, “Why have no miracles been given to Muhammad from his Lord, like those miracles given to the 
messengers before him?” O Messenger! say to them: “Miracles are only in the control of Allah, may He be glorified; He 
grants them whenever He wishes. It is not in my power to bring them; I am only a clear warner to you of the punishment 
of Allah.” 

@ O Messenger! Is it not sufficient for these people who propose miracles, that we have revealed the Qur’an upon you 
which it recited to them? Indeed, in the Qur’an is mercy and exhortation to believing people, because they are the ones 
who truly benefit from whatever it contains. Therefore, whatever has been revealed to them is better than that which they 
suggest should be sent down: similar to what was sent to Messengers previously. 

@ O Messenger! Say: “Allah, may He be glorified, is enough as a witness to my truthfulness in what I convey, and to 
your rejection of it. He knows everything that is in the heavens and everything that is on Earth; nothing is hidden from 
Him. As for those who bring faith upon falsehood in worshipping anything instead of Allah, whilst rejecting the being 
who alone is worthy of worship, they are the true losers because of them choosing disbelief over belief. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Debating with the people of the Book should only be done in the best of ways. 

2. It is a prerequisite of faith to believe in all Messengers without exception. 

3. The noble Qur’an is an everlasting miracle and sign of the truthfulness of the Prophet. 


























IP\ X-J) tL^j> (^) O /JLlj S ^7fi_9 *cio^^Xu\£ij 

< 4 ^ xJ ^ ^ jLJo ^ 3 i($) V ol$ 

O^JlSoJyuj 

ojXLs^s Q^> AjL^ c $fe3\ oii^ ^ 01-^ ^ ^ 

tJrui V$( ffi ) SSzjJ*>rZ Ixjj 1 *POj^ 3 ^ 5 jb\i ( ju^ ( ^ / ($) 



O^ (^) ^jA^Lsi \j^ b? ^ W^“c^5 


I cJt cyX^^j ($) 

Ol}_j(§)J^r^\ ^S^5 J^^lS W^3j 
j (3^-Cr 0 ^ &* 




@ O Messenger! The idolaters want for you to 
bring quickly the punishment you warned them of. 
Had it not been for Allah already having decreed 
an unmovable time for their punishment, it would 
definitely have come upon them. And it will come 
upon them suddenly, when they do not expect it to. 
(Sj§S) They want you to bring the punishment you 
warned them of quickly. Indeed, the hellfire Allah 
has warned the disbelievers of will surround them; 
they will not be able to escape its torment. 

@ On the day when the punishment will cover 
them from above and will be spread under their 
feet, Allah will say to them, rebuking them, “Taste 
the requital of the idolatry and sins you used to 
commit!” 

{§} “O my servants! Emigrate from the land in 
which you are unable to worship Me. Indeed, My 
land is vast, so worship Me alone and do not ascribe 
anyone as partner to Me.” 

@ “Let not the fear of death prevent you from em¬ 
igrating. Every soul shall taste death, and then to 
Me alone you shall return on the Day of Judgment 
to give account and be requited.” 

Those who have faith in Allah and perform 
good deeds through which they draw closer, I will 
accomodate them in raised dwellings under which 
rivers flow, wherein they shall reside forever. How 
great is this reward of those who live in obedience 
to Allah! 

@ How great is the reward of those who act in the 
obedience of Allah and remain steadfast on it while 
refraining from His disobedience, and upon Him 
alone do they rely in all their affairs, 
jjj) All creatures - despite their innumerability - that are incapable of storing their own provisions, Allah sustains them and 
you. Therefore not emigrating out of fear of starvation is not a valid excuse for you. He is the hearer of your statements 
and knower of your intentions and actions; none of them are hidden from Him, and He shall requite you for them. 
jJS O Messenger! If you ask these idolaters, “Who created the heavens and the earth? Who put the sun and moon into 
orbit, such that they come after each other?” they will say, “Allah is the one who created the heavens and the earth, and 
put the sun and moon into constant orbit.” How then can they turn away from bringing faith in only Allah to the worship 
of deities instead of Him that do not bring benefit nor cause harm? 

(S§JS) Allah expands the sustenance for whoever He wishes from His servants and constricts it for whoever He wishes; this 
is due to wisdom only He is aware of. Indeed, Allah knows everything; no solution required for His servants is hidden 
from Him. 

{§J5 And O Messenger! If you were to ask the idolaters, “Who is it that causes the rain to descend from the sky, and con¬ 
sequently causes the earth to grow after it became barren?” they would definitely say, “Allah is the one who causes the 
rain to fall from the sky and the earth to grow because of it.” O Messenger! Say: “All praise is for Allah who has made 
the evidence clear against you!” However, the crux of the matter is that the majority of them will not understand, because 
if they were to understand they would not worship idols that do not benefit or harm them. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. A disbeliever seeking the punishment early is proof of his foolishness. 

2. The door for emigration to protect the practice of one’s religious rituals is open. 

3. The virtue of patience and reliance on Allah. 

4. Acknowledging the lordship of Allah without acknowledging His exclusive worship does not grant a person salvation 
and true faith. 


I ■) yCi 

JjP I 

] 0 _^a £=*\ S js sift )jS 
















\j£'l >^jLil ^c|i£^J> ^ ^ <$) 

(^) J^ 1 ^kjf^ 01*^^ 

^v-^So. aj^\ )^z 4j^ 

<Jp CjSjrV^ 


@ This worldly life with all its temptations and 
enjoyments, is only amusement and play for those 
who are attached to it; it will expire quickly. In¬ 
deed, the abode of the afterlife is the real life, due to 
it being eternal. If only they knew, they would not 
have given preference to that which is temporary, 
over that which is eternal. 

After Allah established a contradiction against the 
idolaters by their belief in Allah’s Lordship after 
they are asked with regards to who created the 
heavens and the earth, together with their disbelief 
in His being exclusively worthy of worship, He es¬ 
tablishes another contradiction against them. That 
is, their sincerity in proclaiming the oneness of Al¬ 
lah when they are faced with drowning, but return¬ 
ing to idolatry when they are safe from it. He says, 

@ When the idolaters board ships and sail the 
ocean, they call out to Allah alone, sincerely sup¬ 
plicating to Him to save them from drowning. Af¬ 
ter Allah saves them from drowning, they return to 
their idolatry, calling out to their idols together with 
Him. 

(E§§) They return to their idolatry so that they can 
continue showing ingratitude for My favours upon 
them and so that they can carry on enjoying the 
beauty of the worldly life. They will soon know the 
evil punishment that awaits them when they die. 

@ Do these people who reject the blessings of 
Allah upon them not see another blessing of His 
after He saves them from drowning, that He made a 
sanctuary for them in which their lives and wealth 
are secure? This is while those around them are 
raided, killed, looted, and taken captive together 
with their wives and children. Do they still believe in their false deities and reject the bounties of Allah, not showing Him 
gratitude for them? dj) There is no one more oppressive than the one who fabricates a lie with regards to Allah by attrib¬ 
uting a partner to Him, or by rejecting the truth that His Messenger has brought to him. Undoubtedly there is an abode 
in Hell for the disbelievers, and those like them. @ And those who strive hard in My cause, seeking My pleasure, I will 
certainly grant them the ability to tread the straight path. Indeed, Allah is with those who do good by helping, assisting 
and guiding them. 



Surah Ar-Rum (Rome) 


^ Themes of the Surah: 

Concentration is placed on mentioning the reality of existence that full power to change affairs, circumstances and con¬ 
ditions belongs to Allah alone, as He has said, ‘For Allah belongs the command, before and after.’ 

® Explanation: 

(Sj) Alif Lam Meem. The discussion on similar letters has already passed at the beginning of Surah Al-Baqarah. 
jjj) The Persians have defeated the Romans. 

(Sj) In the nearer lands of Levant. The Romans, after their defeat will be vitorious over them again. (0) Within a time 
period not before three years and not after ten. To Allah belongs the command, prior to the Roman’s victory and after it. 
And on the day the Romans defeat the Persians, the believers will be happy. JjlJ) They will be happy because of the help of 
Allah being with the Romans due to them being the people of the book. Allah helps whoever He wishes against whoever 
He wishes; He is the Almighty who cannot be overcome, the Merciful towards His believing servants. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. During times of severe difficulty the idol worshippers only seek refuge and help from Allah while forgetting their idols. 
When the difficulty is removed and ease comes they ascribe partners to Allah. This is a clear proof of their misguidance. 

2. Striving in the path of Allah is a cause of being guided to the truth. 3. The detailed announcement of future events in 
the Qur’an is clear evidence of this book being revealed from Allah. 




























__ ^ J> ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ° 'T "ft ^ ^ y _ 

0^<k—tlj\ tfUi\ (J^c>\ja^ <A-^j 3 j\ T $ \ jJ>OLL effi (^) cjjdJ^P 

X45t^-^ j^-ls 3^h^ i? 


l^I^A..^. 0 ^~^_) (_$ Lil? ^ 

v$ o^L^bjJk^ (j^SJf 

Li-4/L^==\ Ljk_j^»_P_j (_^jTi ®j^ 

^L^i^cs 

| jj>10^c^l%l^l^^ol j^l oiji aX^p 

4^ 1^, d -^Ay f?X^ ^ 9 ^r?. ^ \ 0 ijj* 


OS 




(0) This victory was a promise from Allah, and with 
its fulfilment, the believers will increase in their 
conviction of Allah’s promise of victory being true. 
As for the majority of people, they do not under¬ 
stand this due to their disbelief. 

@ They do not know faith and the rulings of the 
Shariah; they only know of the superficial mat¬ 
ters of worldly life, related to earning a livelihood, 
whilst they turn away from the real life of the after¬ 
life, not paying any attention to it. 

(jfj) Do these rejecting idolaters not ponder in them¬ 
selves as to how Allah has created them and ar¬ 
ranged them together in their most complete forms? 
Allah did not create the heavens and the earth ex¬ 
cept for a just cause; He did not create them in vain 
and He appointed a fixed time for their existence in 
the world. Indeed, many people reject the meeting 
of their Lord on the Day of Judgement, and that 
is why they are not prepared for the resurrection 
by doing good deeds which are acceptable to their 
Lord. 

jjD Do these people not travel the earth so that they 
can ponder over what the outcome of the nations 
who rejected Allah before them was? Those nations 
were much stronger than them; they adapted the 
land for farming and construction, and populated it 
much more than these people have. Their Messen¬ 
gers brought clear proofs and evidences for the one¬ 
ness of Allah but they were rejected. So when Allah 
punished them, He was not oppressive, rather they 
themselves were oppressive by leading themselves 
to destruction by disbelief. 

<3 Then, the outcome of those who did evil deeds 

i.e. idolatry and sins, was an extremely evil outcome. It was because they rejected the signs of Allah and would mock at 
and make fun of them. 

@ Allah starts the creation without any previous example, then He causes it to die, then will resurrect it. Then to Him 
alone will you return to be accounted for and requited on the Day of Judgement. 

@ On the day when the hour arrives, the criminals shall lose hope in the mercy of Allah and their hopes in Allah’s mercy 
will end just as their arguments/excuses will end. 

3 They will not have anyone to intercede for them from those whom they used to worship besides Allah will not inter¬ 
cede for them, to save them from the punishment. Rather, they will reject one another. The idolaters will reject those they 
used to worship due to them forsakening them in their time of need; they are all equal in being doomed. 

3 And on the day the hour arrives, the people will all be divided in requital according to their deeds in the world. Some 
will be elevated to the highest ranks, while others will be demoted to the lowest of the low. 

@ As for those who have faith in Allah and did good deeds pleasing to Him, they will be in paradise, happy with what¬ 
ever everlasting bounties they find within it. 

Beneficial Points: 

1. Knowledge of that which rectifies the world whilst being neglectful of what rectifies one’s afterlife is of no benefit. 

2. The signs of Allah in the horizon as well as within ourselves are enough of an evidence that He alone should be wor¬ 
shipped. 

3. Oppression was the cause of the destruction of the previous nations. 

4. The disbeliever will lose all hope on the Day of Judgement just as his excuses will end. 

5. On the Day of Judgement, Allah shall elevate the believers and demote the disbelievers. 


tj yul \ 13>\S apL xii \ J*jr& 


Ar-Rum 


Part 21 















X 


« ~x ^ 



@ As for those who disbelieve in Allah and reject 
His verses that were revealed to His Messengers, 
the resurrection and the accounting, they are the 
ones who will constantly punished. 

@ So glorify Allah when you enter the night, the 
time of the two night prayers: Al-Maghrib and 
Al- 4 Isha, and also glorify Him when you enter the 
morning: the time of the Fajr prayer, 
jjj) And for Allah, may He be glorified, is all praise; 
the angels praise Him in the heavens and His crea¬ 
tions praise Him on Earth. And glorify Him when 
you enter the evening: the time of the ‘Asr prayer, 
together with glorifying Him at the time of Az- 
Zuhr. 

@ He extracts the living from the dead, like His 
extracting a human from a drop of semen and a 
chick from an egg. He also extracts the dead from 
the living, like His extracting a drop of semen from 
a human and an egg from a chicken. He revives the 
earth after it has become dry by sending down rain 
and regrowing it. Likewise you will be resurrected 
from your graves for accountability and requital. 

(j§p From among the great signs of Allah which 
prove His power and oneness, is that He created 
you - O people! - from earth when He created your 
father from clay, then you soon became many hu¬ 
mans increasing through reproduction, and spread¬ 
ing over the earth’s east and west. 

@ From also from among the great signs of Al¬ 
lah which prove His power and oneness, is that He 
created for you - O men! - wives from among your 
species so that you may find contentment in them 
due to your special compatibility, and He put love 
and affection between you. Indeed, in the aforementioned are clear proofs and evidences for people who contemplate, 
because they are the ones who benefit by using their intellect. 

From among His great signs which prove His power and oneness, is that He created the heavens and the earth, and 
your different languages and skin colours. Indeed, in the aforementioned are proofs and evidences for the people of 
knowledge and insight. 

@ From among His great signs which prove His power and oneness, is your sleeping by night and wakefulness by day, 
so that you may rest from the tiredness of your work. And from among His signs is that He made the day so that you may 
disperse, seeking sustenance from your Lord. Indeed, in the aforementioned are proofs and evidences for people who 
listen attentively while contemplating and accepting. 

(jp From among His great signs which prove His power and oneness, is that He shows you the lightening in the sky, and 
combines within it fear of the thunderclaps and hope of rain. He also sends down rainwater for you from the heavens, 
and revives the earth by the regrowth of plants after it has dried up. Indeed, in that are clear proofs and evidences for 
understanding people, so that they may draw conclusions by it on resurrection after death for accountability and requital. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. A servant filling up his times with prayer and glorification of Allah is a sign of him facing a good outcome. 

2. Conclusions can be drawn on resurrection by the continuity of life, in that Allah creates the living from the dead and 
vice versa. 

3. No one takes heed from Allah’s signs in the bodies and horizons except those who use their physical and mental fac¬ 
ulties granted to them by Allah. 




Ar-Rum 


Part 21 
















i * V 




oyL2ii c3 c^/4}0 ^ o^ eS^ 

3^ <j ^^\])^ (J^=^u^^\j 

c>3^\^^0\&Z$\ & ^ 6 >fe/oi ^4 
I ^===*3 < 3 / 3 *^ ^y*j of£^i5 

cu^=iLa \5 tytj*£=& yAj^Lj^yj. 
| = ^ AjjJ L t_| «A ^ ^ r*~" 




1$) u4>4^ c^ e£<jli 

A^=>\ OJ^ 4J^\ 


l'< 


<1S$\cjZ 


ut 






U>3 


Ar-Rum 


Part 21 


@ And from among the signs of Allah which prove 
His power and oneness, is the upstanding of the sky 
without it falling and the earth not falling apart due 
to His command. Then, when He will call you once 
from the earth by the angel blowing the trumpet, 
you will suddenly emerge from your graves to give 
account and be requited. 

@ And to Allah alone belongs whoever is in heav¬ 
ens and the earth, Allah created them, owns them 
and has full control over them. Everyone of His cre¬ 
ations in the heavens and the earth are obedient to 
Him and submissive to His command. 

(jp He is the one who initiates the creation without 
there being anything like it before, then he resur¬ 
rects it after making it expire. Bringing it back is 
easier than initiating it, but both are easy for Him 
because whenever He intends something, He says 
“Be!” and it happens. For Him Mighty and Majes¬ 
tic is the highest of praise in whatever qualities of 
majesty and perfection he is praised with. He is the 
almighty who cannot be overcome, the Wise in His 
creation and decree. 

(jp O idolaters! Allah mentions an example for 
you of yourselves: do you have partners from your 
slaves who are equals to you in everything you own, 
such that you fear them just as you fear each oth¬ 
er? Would you be happy for yourselves with your 
slaves being such? No doubt, you would not be 
happy with such an arrangement, so Allah is more 
worthy that He does not have a partner from His 
creation in His kingdom. Like that example and in 
other ways, Allah clearly explains different proofs 
and evidences for understanding people, because 


they are the ones who benefit from them. 

{§p Their deviance is not because of any deficiency in proofs, nor of them not being explained, it is only because of fol¬ 
lowing desires and their forefathers. So who is there that is capable of guiding those whom Allah has caused to deviate? 
No one is capable of it. There will have no helpers to prevent the punishment from them. 

(jp O Messenger! Turn your face, you and those with you, directing it towards the True Religion which Allah has directed 
you, turning away from all other religions: the religion of Islam upon which Allah intrinsically created people. There is 
no changing the creation of Allah, it is the correct and upright religion in which there is no deviation, but the majority of 
people do not know this. 

J|p And return to Him, may He be glorified, by repenting from your sins, be mindful of Him by fulfilling His commands 
and refraining from His prohibitions, perform prayer with perfection, and do not be from the idolaters who go against 
nature and ascribe partners with Allah by worshipping them. 

@ And do not be from those idolaters who changed their religion, believing in some of it and rejecting other parts of it. 
They split into groups and sects, each sect happy with whatever falsehood they were on, thinking that they alone were 
upon the truth and others were on falsehood. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Each creation of Allah is submissive to Him, either optionally or by force. 

2. The initial creation clearly proves resurrection. 

3. Giving examples to clarify the truth and falsehood is desirable. 

4. Following desires deviates and misleads. 

5. The religion of Islam is the only religion accepted by those of sound disposition. 























@ When the idolaters are afflicted by a difficul¬ 
ty i.e. poverty, drought, they supplicate only to 
their Lord, may He be glorified, returning to Him 
humbling themselves and seeking refuge in Him to 
remove the affliction from them. Then, when He 
shows them mercy by removing whatever afflicted 
them, they return to their ways of idolatry by sup¬ 
plicating to others along with Him. 

They do so to reject the bounties of Allah, from 
amongst them is removing their difficulty. So those 
who ascribe partners to Me should enjoy the ease 
they have in this life for surely they will come to 
know on the Day of Judgement that they were in 
clear misguidance. 

What invited them to ascribing partners with 
Allah when they have no proof supporting it? I did 
not send any evidence to them in the form of any 
scripture which they could use as proof for their as¬ 
cribing partners with Allah, nor do they have any 
scripture which talks in favour of their idolatry and 
upholds the validity of the disbelief they are on. 
jj) And when I give the people a taste of some of 
My bounties, i.e. health and wealth, they become 
happy with it; a happiness based on arrogance and 
pride. And if something that hanns them reaches 
them, i.e. illness or poverty due to the sins they 
commit, they begin losing hope in the mercy of 
Allah and in the difficulty going away from them. 

@ Do they not see that Allah expands the suste¬ 
nance for whichever of His servants He wishes, 
testing them to see whether they show gratitude or 
ingratitude? And He constrains sustenance upon 
whomsoever He wishes, testing to see whether they 
are patience or become angry. Indeed, in the increasing of provision for some, and its constriction upon others, are proofs 
of the kindness and mercy of Allah. 

(jp) O Muslim! Give the relative whatever goodness and kinship he deserves, give the needy whatever he can fulfil his 
need with and help the stranger whose path back home has been cut off. Giving in these causes is better for those who 
seek the pleasure of Allah; those who give priority to this kind of assistance and rights are the ones who succeed by 
achieving their objective of paradise, and being granted safety from the feared punishment. 

After Allah mentioned actions through which one can gain closeness to Allah, He mentioned the opposite: those actions 
through which the cheap worldly objectives are sought, saying: 

Whatever wealth you give to anyone with the expectation that they will.return it to you with an increase, that wealth 
does not grow with Allah. And whatever wealth you give to fulfil someone’s need, desiring only the pleasure of Allah, 
and not praise or reward from the people, the reward of that deed shall be multiplied for you by Allah. 

@ Allah Himself is the one who alone created you, then granted you sustenance, then will cause you to die, then revive 
you for the resurrection. Is there any of your idols which you worship that can do any of the above? He is far above and 
free of what the idolaters say and believe. 

@ Corruption has appeared in the land and sea in the lives of people by their span becoming shorter, and in their bodies 
by way of diseases and illnesses, due to the sins they commit. It has become apparent so that Allah may give them a taste 
of some of their evil deeds in the worldly life, perhaps they repent to Him. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The idolaters contradict themselves by sincerely worshipping Allah at times of severity, and ascribing partners to Him 
in times of ease. 

2. The happiness based on arrogance at times of enjoying bounties, and losing hope in mercy at times of trials are two 
traits of the disbelievers. 

3. Giving due rights to people is a cause of success. 

4. Interest is eradicated and the reward of spending in the path of Allah is multiplied. 

5. The effects of sins are evident in the spreading of plagues and spoiling of the environment. 




















{J) Say - O Messenger, to these idolaters: “Travel 
the earth and ponder over what the outcome of the 
rejecting nations before you was. Their outcome 
was an evil one; the majority of them would ascribe 
partners with Allah, worshipping others with Him, 
and they were destroyed because of it.” 

@ O Messenger! Turn your face in the direction 
of the correct religion of Islam in which there is 
no deviation, before the Day of Judgment comes. 
When it comes, there will be no one to prevent it, 
and on that day people will be divided: one group 
shall be pampered in paradise, while the other shall 
be punished in the hellfire. 

@ Whoever disbelieves in Allah, the harm of his 
disbelief - which is pennanent residence in the hell- 
fire - will reach only himself. As for those who do 
good deeds seeking Allah’s pleasure through them, 
they are preparing for themselves entry into para¬ 
dise and deriving enjoyment from whatever is with¬ 
in it, and they shall live in it forever. 

{J) Allah will separate the people and divide them 
into two groups, so that He can reward those who 
have faith in Allah and perform good deeds that He 
is pleased with. Indeed, He does not love those who 
disbelieve in Him and His Messengers. Rather, He 
hates them severely and will punish them on the 
Day of Judgement. 

@ And from His great signs that prove His power 
and oneness is that He sends winds that give glad 
tidings of imminent rain to the servants, and so that 
He may give you - O people! - a taste of His mercy 
by the greenery and ease that follows the rainfall. 
And also so that the ships can sail the sea by His 
will and you can seek from His grace by trading across the ocean. Perhaps you will show gratitude upon the favours of 
Allah so He may increase you in them. 

@) O Messenger! Verily, I have sent many Messengers to their people before you, so they brought miracles proving their 
truthfulness but the people rejected whatever their Messengers brought to them. So, we took retribution from those com¬ 
mitted evil and destroyed them with My punishment, saving the Messengers and those who brought faith in them from 
destruction. It is a right I have obligated upon myself to rescue the believers and help them. 

@ Allah, may He be glorified, is the one who sends the winds and drives them. Those winds gather and move the clouds, 
stretching them in the sky however He wishes, either little or large; He also makes them into pieces sometimes. O ob¬ 
server! You then see the rain coming from within it, so when the rain reaches whichever of His servants He wishes, they 
become happy with the mercy of Allah upon them in the form of rainfall that will cause the earth to grow that which they 
and their livestock need. 

@ While just previously, they had been losing hope in any rain falling upon them. 

(Sj) O Messenger! Look at the effects of the rainfall that Allah sends out of mercy for His servants; how Allah revives 
the earth with the various plants that grow after it had dried up and become barren. Indeed, the being who revived that 
dry earth is the one who will resurrect the dead as living; He is capable of everything, nothing is beyond His power and 
ability. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The people will be categorised on the Day of Judgment according to their deeds in the world, into either successful or 
wretched. 

2. Sending winds and rain, and causing the ships to sail in the sea: are blessings which require gratitude to be expressed 
for them. 

3. Destroying the criminals and saving the believers is a divine custom of Allah. 

4. The earth growing after it has become barren is evidence of resurrection. 


* _ ^ ^ ■» ^ 

C cd d“£ 


Ar-Rum 


Part 21 















j 


LL1 


|j 


JL-y^>\ 

" 2 » j k£ ^ ^ 



-\-^ ^00 




@ If we were to send upon their farms and crops 
a wind which would spoil them, and they were to 
then see their crops yellow in colour after they had 
previously been green, they would then begin to 
show ingratitude to the numerous other bounties of 
Allah they were given before that. 

(jp So just as you are incapable of making the dead 
and deaf hear, after they have distanced themselves 
from you to emphasise their inability to hear you, 
likewise you cannot guide those who are similar to 
them if they turn away and do not benefit. 

@ You are not able to guide those who have de¬ 
viated from the straight path, onto treading the 
right path. Neither are you able to make anyone 
hear something beneficial to them, except those 
who believe in My Verses, because only they are 
the ones who will benefit from whatever you say; 
they are the ones submissive and accepting of My 
command. 

O people! Allah is the one who created you from 
a despised fluid, then He gave you the strength of 
manhood after the weakness of childhood, then 
gave you the weakness of old age after the strength 
of manhood. Allah creates whatever He wishes 

i.e. strength and weakness; He is he Knower of 
everything, nothing is hidden from Him; the Capa¬ 
ble nothing is beyond His power and ability. 

On the day judgement shall occur, the criminals 
will swear that had not been in their graves except 
a very short period of time. Likewise they were de¬ 
luded in the world by denying the truth. 

(Sj) Those prophets and angels to whom Allah has 
granted knowledge will say, “You remained for as 
long as Allah decreed according to His infinite knowledge, until the day of your resurrection which you would deny, but 
you did not know that the resurrection was a reality and so you rejected it.” 

So on the day when Allah shall resurrect all creations to give account and be requited, all the excuses the wrongdoers 
made up will not benefit them, and it will not be asked of them to now please Allah by repenting, because of the time for 
it having expired. 

And verily, taking the people into consideration, I have mentioned every type of example for them in this Qur’an, so 
that the truth becomes clearly distinguished to them from falsehood. O Messenger! If you were to bring to them a clear 
proof of your truthfulness, those who disbelieve in Allah would say, “You only bring futile things!” 

Allah seals and misguides the heart of those who purposely reject the signs you bring them. Likewise Allah seals the 
heart of every disbeliever of the truth. 

@ O Messenger! Bear patience on the rejection of your people of you. Indeed, Allah’s promise to you of help and estab¬ 
lishment no doubt remains. Let not those who do not believe they are going to be resurrected, lead you to become hasty 
and impatient. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The disbelievers despair of the mercy of Allah when a trial comes upon them. 

2. Placing guidance in the hearts is in Allah’s hands alone, not in the hands of the Messenger (peace be upon him). 

3. The stages of life are lessons for those who take heed. 

4. Sins are the cause of hearts becoming sealed. 


oil 


Ar-Rum 


410 


Part 21 


















Surah Luqman 


*i\"U A'L'','*J' 



Cp <A^>) g- 0 >] ^ 

>-& $ o 0 jp V-3 ^ QjyLjaJ l jul' yCs-^o>c^il. 

L$ A^14 ^y^v^.Li ^ ^Jj>Xjl^ \ 

£&r}l^ 

*s±\ 3Lj \^& ^yj^l>- 



® Themes of the Surah: 

Emphasis on the point of following the wisdom of 
Allah in the Qur’an, and mention of the story of 
Luqman as an example. 

® Explanation: 

{j} Alif Lam Meem. The discussion on similar let¬ 
ters has already passed at the beginning of Surah 
Al-Baqarah. 

(0) O Messenger! These verses that have been re¬ 
vealed to you are verses of the book full of wisdom. 
CfJ It is guidance and mercy for those who do good, 
by fulfilling the rights of their Lord and His serv¬ 
ants. 

(0) Those who perform prayer in the most complete 
manner and give Zakat of their wealth, and they are 
convinced of the resurrection, account and reward 
in the afterlife. 

© Those who possess those characteristics are 
upon guidance from their Lord, and it is they who 
are successful by gaining whatever they seek and 
being distanced from what they fear. 

After Allah mentioned the qualities of those who do 
good. He mentions the traits of the evildoers: 

@ There are people - like An-Nadr bin Al-Harith 
- who take up stories to distract people away from 
the religion of Allah inconspicuously, and take the 
verses of Allah as a joke, mocking them. Those 
who possess these characteristics have a humiliat¬ 
ing punishment awaiting them in the afterlife. 

@ When you read My verses to him, he turns away 
in arrogance, as if he has not heard them; as if his 
ears are deaf to sounds. So O Messenger! Warn him of a painful punishment which awaits him! 

(Sj) Indeed, those who have faith and do good deeds will have gardens of bounties, in which they shall live in luxury 
among everything Allah has prepared for them. 

jjj) They will remain therein. Allah has promised that to them, a true promise in which there is no doubt. He is the Al¬ 
mighty who no one can overcome; the Wise in His creation, decree and legislation. 

@ Allah, may He be glorified, created the heavens which are raised without any pillars, pitched mountains on Earth 
firmly, so that they do not shake with you, dispersed animals over the earth, and sent down rainfall from the sky, causing 
the earth to grow all kinds of delightful plants, from which both the humans and animals benefit. 

@ O idolaters! The aforementioned is all the creation of Allah, so show Me what those you worship other than Allah 
have created. Rather, the wrongdoers are in clear deviance from the truth, because they attribute such objects to Allah that 
cannot create anything, but are themselves created. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Obedience to Allah leads to success in the world and the afterlife. 

2. All speech and action that prevents from the straight path is forbidden. 

3. Arrogance prevents following the truth. 

4. Creation is an attribute solely belonging to Allah. He challenges the idolaters to show what their deities/Allahs have 
created. 


^ —' —' ^ ^ ^ 9^ 


Luqman 




Part 21 


























| \)y» 

\ r 




cy*j jjai 

J\i 




*> 




\j<* 


&* 


l£^*^L>j l\i\ s _j^l^4i^r U^31^-4*-^ ^^9 



@ Verily, I granted Luqman the understanding of 
religion and correctness in matters, and I told him, 

“O Luqman! Be grateful to your Lord for the bless¬ 
ing of being able to obey Him He has bestowed 
upon you. Whoever is grateful to his Lord, his 
gratefulness benefits only himself for Allah is not 
dependant upon it, and whoever rejects His bless¬ 
ings, the harm of his rejection afflicts him alone, 
for his rejection does not hurt Allah in the slightest; 
indeed Allah is totally independent of His creation 
and praiseworthy in every condition.” 

@ O Messenger! Remember when Luqman said to 
his son, encouraging him to do good and warning 
him from evil, “O my son! Do not worship any of 
the creation along with Allah; indeed the worship 
of a deity besides Allah is a grave injustice on the 
self, and is a cause for permanently staying in the 
hellfire.” 

{§} And I commanded the human to obey his par¬ 
ents and do good towards them in matters that do 
not lead to the disobedience of Allah. His mother 
carried him in her womb having to face difficul¬ 
ty upon difficulty, weaning him off breastfeeding 
within two years. I told him: “Be grateful to Allah 
for every blessing He has bestowed upon you, then 
be grateful to your parents for their care and up¬ 
bringing of you. To Me alone is your return, upon 
which I shall requite each person as he deserves.” 

@ And even if your parents strive to incite you 
upon ascribing partners to Allah according to their 
ignorant/arbitrary understanding - like what the 
mother of Sa‘d bin Abl Waqqas did to him - then do 
not obey them in that, because there is no obedience 
to the creation in the disobedience to the Creator. Rather, live with them in the world with goodness, maintaining ties and 
friendship. And follow the path of those who proclaim My oneness repeatedly and obey Me; to Me alone is your return 
on the Day of Judgment so that I may tell you of the actions you used to do in the world and requite you for them. 

@ O my son! Indeed, evil and good, no matter how small, even if they equal to the weight of a mustard seed and are in the 
middle of a rock so no one is aware, or in any place in the heavens or earth, Allah will Indeed, bring them on the Day of 
Judgment and requite the servant for them. Allah is the most subtle, whose knowledge encompasses all secret and hidden 
matters. He is kind to His servants and aware of everything. 

(jjj) O my son! Establish the prayer by performing it to perfection; enjoin good and forbid evil, and bear patience upon 
whatever adversity you face in the process. Indeed, my instructions to you are from those that Allah has decided you 
should do, so you have no choice in doing or not doing them. 

Cj) Do not turn your face away from the people in arrogance, and do not walk over the earth haughty and proud; indeed 
Allah does not love any of those who are haughty in their manner of walking, or arrogant in whatever blessings they are 
granted and ungrateful for. Rather, He hates them. 

@ Be moderate in your manner of walking: between hastiness and lethargy, displaying dignity. And lower your voice; do 
not raise it such that it causes inconvenience. Indeed, the most hideous of sounds is that of the donkey because of them 
being loud. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The benefit of obedience and harm of sin returns to affect the servant. 

2. It is obligatory to take care of children by educating them and bringing them up well. 

3. Be obedient to parents, especially the mother. 

4. There is no obedience to the creation in the disobedience to the Creator. 

5. The accounting on the Day of Judgment will be meticulous. 

6. Islamic governance (on etiquettes) covers both the individual and social spheres. 


I 4— >~l\ \j&4. l )\ j 

o\i 


EU. 


9 (^LruJ-\ Cl 




Luqman 


412 


















j yyj i-^i^s) c^ i k^ ^jsS/_ 9 l£ 5 

o^jb' Vj^-Vis^ J^j>-j\j* ^po y->^ ^ 4j^\ <Jy \ 

I * (fo 3x>( N \j j*—& fr^Oo ^ 

^ ^ ^ *4 ^ ^ j ^ "T T \ ^ ^ I 

<]j£jjT k^ WijlI^L^ Jjii > cip A^>j 

j ^JJ^a>\ C>\ jopAc-4ii\ JL^*?^® ^)i | 


(3"® 4Jll ^"' , Ojb 

2la£=^ 

j O0$i 0 (^ V^fis 4^i\ o\jj0J^)j j 


<0 0 People! Do you not see and witness that Allah 
has made it easy for you to take benefit from the 
whatever is in the heavens: the sun, moon and stars, 
and has also made it easy for you to take benefit 
from the livestock, trees and plants on earth? He 
has also perfected His blessings for you which are 
clear to the eyes: beautiful appearances and delight¬ 
ful scenes, and those that are hidden from sight i.e. 
intelligence and knowledge. Despite all these bless¬ 
ings, there are some people who dispute in the one¬ 
ness of Allah without having any knowledge based 
on revelation from Allah or insightful intelligence, 
nor a clear book revealed from Allah. 

@ If it is said to these disputers regarding the one¬ 
ness of Allah, “Follow the revelation Allah has re¬ 
vealed to His Messenger!” they say, “I will not fol¬ 
low it, rather, I will follow in the worship of idols 
that I found our forefathers doing.” Will they fol¬ 
low their forefathers even though Satan is the one 
calling them towards deviance by inviting them to 
worship idols, that will lead them to the punishment 
of a blazing fire on the Day of Judgement? 

0 Whoever turns to Allah sincerely devoting wor¬ 
ship to Him and doing good deeds, he has held on 
to the firmest of things those who hope for salva¬ 
tion can hold on to. He will not fear whatever he 
has held on to being cut off. and to Allah alone re¬ 
turn all affairs; He will requite each person as they 
deserve. 

0 O Messenger! Whoever disbelieves in Allah, let 
not their disbelief grieve you. To Me alone they will 
return on the Day of Judgement; I will inform them 
of the evils they committed in the world and requite 
them for them. Indeed, Allah knows what is in the hearts; nothing is hidden from Him. 

(01 will let them enjoy whatever delicacies I have given them in the world for a short while, then compel them to a severe 
punishment on the Day of Judgement: the punishment of the hellfire. 

0 O Messenger! If you ask these idolaters: “Who created the heavens and who created the earth?” they will say: “Allah 
created them.” Say to them: “All praise is for Allah who has made the evidence against you clear.” However, the majority 
of them do not know who deserves all praise, because of their ignorance. 

@ To Allah alone belongs everything that is in the heavens and the earth, in terms of being His creation, under His 
ownership and decree. Allah is self sufficient, not in need of his creation, praiseworthy in this world and the Hearafter. 
0 If all the trees on Earth were to be cut and made into pens, and the seas multiplied by seven and turned into ink, the 
Words of Allah would not finish due to their being infinite. Indeed, Allah is the Almighty whom none can overcome; the 
Wise in His creation and decree. 

@ O people! Your creation and your resurrection for accountability and requital on the Day of Judgement, is as easy as 
creating and resurrecting just one soul. Indeed, Allah hears everything, hearing one sound does not preoccupy Him from 
hearing another; He also sees everything, seeing one thing does not preoccupy Him from hearing another either. And 
likewise, creating something and resurrecting it does not preoccupy Him from creating and resurrecting another. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The blessings of Allah are a means to show gratitude and bringing faith in Him, not a means to disbelief. 

2. Blind following is dangerous, especially in matters of belief. 

3. Submitting to Allah in obedience and doing good deeds for His pleasure is very important. 

4. The Words of Allah never finish. 5. Allah is capable of creating and resurrecting people. 






















[j jLJl a | 


t Wltfkijd 

<s jUJ i 


@ Do you not see that Allah shortens the night to 
lengthen the day, and shortens the day to lengthen 
the night? He also set the orbits of the sun and the 
moon, so each moves in its orbit for a fixed length 
of time. Do you also not see that Allah is aware of 
everything you do; none of your actions are hidden 
from Him, and He will requite you for them. 

That organisation and decree bears testimony 
to Allah alone being true; He is true in His being, 
attributes and actions. It also bears testimony to 
everything that the idolaters worship being un¬ 
founded falsehood, and that Allah is the Exalted in 
His being and His attributes over all His creation; 
there is none higher than Him, and He is greater 
than everything. 

@ Do you not see that the ships sail the sea due 
to His kindness in facilitating for it, so that He can 
show you - O people - from His signs that prove 
His power, may He be glorified, and His kindness. 

Indeed, in that are proofs of His power for every 
person patient upon harms that afflict him; grateful 
for whatever blessings he receives. 

@ And when a mountain-like wave and dark 
clouds surround them from all sides, they call out 
to Allah sincerely supplicating and worshipping 
Him. Then, when Allah accepts their supplication 
and saves them from drowning, bringing them back 
to land, some of them are moderate in their praise, 
falling short of showing due gratitude to Him, 
while others reject the blessing of Allah; None re¬ 
ject My signs except every deceitful person, like 
the one that promised to be grateful if Allah saved 
him, then broke his promise. And none reject My 
signs except every ungrateful person who never shows gratitude for the favours Allah grants him. 

O people! Be mindful of your Lord by fulfilling His commands and refraining from His prohibitions, and fear His 
punishment on the day when no father will be able to benefit his child, nor a child benefit its father in the slightest. Indeed, 
the promise of Allah of requital on the Day of Judgment is true and will inevitably be fulfilled, so let not the worldly 
life and whatever desires and amusements it contains deceive you, nor let Satan deceive you by misunderstanding the 
forbearance of Allah and His delaying the punishment from you. 

@ Indeed, Allah alone has knowledge of the Hour: He knows when it will occur; He sends the rain whenever He wishes 
and He knows what is in the wombs: whether it is male or female, successful or wretched. No soul knows what good or 
bad it will do the next day, nor does it know what land it will die in. Rather, Allah is the one who knows all of that, He is 
Knower and Aware of all that; nothing is hidden from Him. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The shortening and lengthening of the night and day, and the control over the sun and moon: are all signs of the power 
of Allah, may He be glorified, and bounties which are worthy of gratitude. 

2. Patience and gratitude are means that lead to pondering over the signs of Allah. 

3. The faith of an idolater at the time of severity and his consequent disbelief at the time of ease is grave wickedness. 

4. The Day of Judgment is so severe that a relative will not be able to benefit another. 

5. Fear of the Day of Judgment saves one from being deceived by the world, and by submitting to the whispers of Satan. 

6. Allah’s full knowledge of the Ghaib is all encompassing. 


515 cjt 

^V^l5^3_5 \jk3\ Qils 0 

51 & j !\j Wy* do 

zzH&Hf \j$J H 


nnsr 























Surah As-Sajdah (The Prostration) 


s 




oj 

ITS 


j Ai/jV 


Uu 



^ Themes of the Surah: 

Emphasis is placed on mentioning the manifes¬ 
tations of the truth revealed by the Qur’an, from 
which are the reality of creation and the conditions 
of the human. 

^Explanation: 

© Alif Lam Meem. The discussion on similar let¬ 
ters has already passed in Surah Al-Baqarah. 

© This Qur’an that Muhammad (peace be upon 
him) has brought, was revealed to him by the Lord 
of all the worlds. There is no doubt in it. 

© These disbelievers say, “Indeed, Muhammad 
has fabricated it and attributed it to his Lord.” It is 
not as they say, rather, it is the truth in which there 
is no doubt; revealed from your Lord - O Messen¬ 
ger - to you so that you may warn a nation to whom 
no Messenger has come before you, of the punish¬ 
ment of Allah, perhaps they are guided to the truth 
and they follow and practice it. 

© Allah is the one who created the heavens and 
the earth, and created everything in between them 
in six days, while He is capable of creating them 
in less than the time it takes to bat an eyelid. He 
.Tt*5 \ # < t*r ^ B3* then rose over His throne in a manner that befits 

d$d* _Jr M a j est y Q people? You do not have a guardian 

A^ J T<\ ^ who takes care of your affairs other than Him, or an 

'* ^ ^ intercessor who intercedes for you in front of your 

^ ^ A \ ** l T > * * -If .. 9 AX \ WIL Lord. Do you not think and worship Allah who ere- 

^ g; ated you> not worshipping others with Him? 

© Allah organises the affairs of all creations in the 
heavens and the earth, then that affair ascends to 


A^0dddoddjdd ddjlj\ jJla q A: 

CXXA 0 dd* A* 


As-Sajdah 


Part 21 


Him in a day, the duration of which is a thousand years of your counting - O people - in the world. 

© That being who organises all that is aware of everything that is present and absent, none of it is hidden from Him. 
He is the Almighty whom none can overcome; who takes retribution from his enemies and is the Merciful towards His 
believing servants. 

© He is the being who perfected everything He created, and created the human from clay, without there having been a 
previous example of him. 

© He then created the human’s children after it from a delicate fluid: semen. 

© Then He completed the creation of the human in his complete form His soul through the angel appointed with blowing 
the soul, and made for you - O people - ears so that you could hear with them, eyes so that you could see, and hearts so 
that you could understand. Little are you grateful for these bounties of Allah which He bestows upon you. 

© The idolaters who reject the resurrection say, “When we die, our bodies become dust and we become invisible in the 
earth, will we be resurrected alive again, anew? That cannot be understood.” Rather, in reality, they are rejecters of the 
resurrection and do not believe in it. 

© O Messenger! Say to these idolaters who reject the resurrection: “The angel of death who Allah has appointed to 
seize your souls shall do so, then to Me alone you will return on the Day of Judgment to give account and to be requited. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1 .Revelation of the Book being from Allah necessitates hastening towards believing and practicing it. 

2. The wisdom behind sending Messengers is that they guide their people to the straight path. 

3. Creating the creation gradually was to educate the people of the value of doing something gradually, otherwise Allah 
is capable of having created it in less than the time it takes to bat an eyelid. 

4. Allah transcends His creation. 

5. The idolaters think of resurrection to be farfetched, despite clear evidences for it. 

























111 







^^==r£a-^ \lu pL^i is 0 1 

\ \ 3^ \ \iSb\2q 

| ^4i^xj3W^(3)^ 

>6j^o; 



(jp The criminals will soon emerge on the Day of 
Judgment bowing their heads in humiliation due to 
their rejection of resurrection, feeling ashamed and 
saying, “Our Lord! I have seen the resurrection I 
used to reject, and heard the confirmation of that 
which the Messengers brought from You, so return 
us to the worldly life so that I can do good deeds 
that will make You pleased with us. Indeed, I now 
convinced of the resurrection and the truth of what¬ 
ever the Messengers brought.” If you were to see 
the criminals in that state, you would see a grave 
scene! 

(jp And if I wished to give every soul guidance 
and ability, I would have forced them onto this, 
but through wisdom and justice it was necessary 
to pass the decree, that I would definitely fill hell 
on the Day of Judgment with the disbelievers from 
the Thaqalan: the jinns and the humans, because of 
their choosing the path of disbelief and error over 
the path of belief and steadfastness. 

(jp And on the Day of Judgment it will be said to 
them in rebuke and censure, “Now taste the punish¬ 
ment due to your heedlesness of the meeting with 
Allah on the Day of Judgment for accountability 
in the worldly life, I shall leave you in the punish¬ 
ment without caring for how much you suffer from 
it. Taste the punishment of the everlasting hellfire 
that will not end, because of the sins you used to 
commit in the world. 

After Allah mentioned the state of the criminals, He 
mentions the state of the believers, saying, 

@ “Only those people believe in my verses re¬ 
vealed to My Messenger who, when they are re¬ 
minded of them prostate to Allah glorifying Him together with praising Him. They are not arrogant from worshipping 
Him nor prostrating to Him in any condition.” 

@ They leave their beds to worship Allah, supplicating to Him in their prayers, fearing His punishment and hoping in 
His mercy. They also spend the wealth Allah has given them in His path. 

(jp So no one knows what things Allah has prepared for it in terms of bringing coolness and joy to the eyes, as a reward 
for the good deeds it would do in the world. It is a reward that no one except Allah can comprehend, due to its greatness, 
(jp The one who believes in Allah, acts upon His commands and refrains from that which he is prohibited from, is not like 
the one who disobeys Him. The two groups are not equal in terms of requital according to Allah. 

(jp As for those who have faith in Allah and do good deeds, the reward prepared for them is gardens in which they shall 
remain as a mark of honour for them from Allah, a reward for the Allah deeds they used to do in the world. 

(jp As for those who left the obedience of Allah by disbelief and committing sins, the abode prepared for them on the 
Day of Judgment is the hellfire in which they shall remain forever. Every time they attempt to come out of it, they will 
be returned to it, and it will be said to them, rebuking them, “Taste the punishment of the hellfire you used to deny in the 
world, when My Messengers would warn you of it.” 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Bringing faith on the Day of Judgement will not be of benefit to the disbelievers, because of them now being in the 
abode of requital not the abode of actions. 

2. The danger of being unmindful, in this life, of the standing before Allah on the Day of Judgement. 

3. Standing in prayer at night is way of the believers. 

4. Allah has prepared for His Allah-conscious servants things which no eye has ever seen, no ear has ever heard of, and 
no human heart has ever imagined. 

5. Just as the believer and transgressor do not match in qualities, they are not equal in requital either. 




As-Sajdah 

















-ra j* \ L)JJ> \ \ O^J^r^i '-XJj 

l^JO^ JJflij ( ^ QjvLaXJ^ 0 Oi-5^>r^J ^ 

(3 

\^\j ^-^-^ 5 ,\j^i^~5 

(£^2 ol^v jjj~& 

^ c3>^ ^ 13^^43' (£j) | 

s ^ ^ ^ .l> 


4J0 1 


@ I will definitely make these disbelievers who 
left the obedience of their Lord and do not repent, 
suffer trials and afflictions in the worldly life, for 
perhaps due to those worldly afflictions, they will 
repent to Allah. 

@ There is no one more oppressive than the one 
who is admonished with the verses of Allah but 
does not take heed, but turns away without caring 
about them. Indeed, I will inevitably take retribu¬ 
tion from the criminals, because of their commit¬ 
ting disbelief and sins, and their turning away from 
the My verses. 

@ Verily, I gave Moses the Torah, so - O Messen¬ 
ger - do not be in doubt over you having met Moses 
in the Night Journey and the Ascension. I made the 
book revealed to Moses a guide for the Israelites 
from deviance. 

(j|j) And I made leaders from the Children of Is¬ 
rael whom the people would emulate and follow. 
They became guides to the truth when they were 
patient in calling others to Allah and fulfilling the 
commands of Allah and refraining from His prohi¬ 
bitions, and when they firmly believed in His Ayahs 
that were revealed to their Messengers. 

@> O Messenger! Indeed, your Lord is the one who 
§j£ wiU J ud S c between them on the Day of Judgment 
^ C— ** ** in matters they would dispute in the world; so He 

^ y> \j V3j \ J. cfc (ft) 6jj . H will make the one on truth clear from the one on 

' ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ *** ** falsehood, and requite each with what they deserve. 

g) Are these people blind that they cannot see how 
many of the previous nations I destroyed before 
them? Here they are, walking past dwellings which 
were previously resided in by those who were de¬ 
stroyed, yet they do not take heed from their state? Indeed, in the destruction of the previous nations due to their disbelief, 
are lessons from which the truth of their Messengers can be proven, who came to them from Allah. Will these rejecters 
of the verses of Allah then not listen attentively using their intellects? 

@ Do these rejecters of resurrection not see that I send rainwater to a barren land in which there are no plants, and then 
take out the crops by rain water, from which their cattle eat as well as themselves? Do they not see that and understand 
that whoever causes the barren earth to grow, is capable of reviving the dead? 

@ Those that reject the resurrection say, while seeking the punishment in haste, “When is this judgement that you claim 
is going to be made between us and yourselves on the Day of Judgement, and consequently our abode will be hellfire 
and yours paradise?” 

{j} O Messenger! Say to them: “O Messenger say to them: the day of the judgement, when it comes, will be too late to 
believe for those who denied the truth in the world. Nor will they be given respite to make repentance.” 

@ O Messenger! So turn away from these people after they have persisted in their deviance, and wait for the punishment 
of Allah to befall them. Indeed, they wait for an unpredictable turn of fortune against you, but in reality they only await 
their destruction. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The punishment of a disbeliever in this world is a means to his repenting. 

2. Turning away from the verses of Allah is dangerous. 

3. Proof of our Prophet (peace be upon him) meeting Moses (peace be upon him) on the Night Journey and the Ascension. 

4. Patience and firm belief are qualities of the leaders in religion. 

5. Sending rain and causing the earth to grow is proof of resurrection on the Day of Judgement. 

6. Repentance from sins can only be done in the world, before seeing death. 


























| | 


MAI 





il^===^ii^o^-aT * 

J^Pj (^) \/^J>- I^j 0^=» 4J^ oi<^-3 lX^ 

=3j 4j^l) <^\ l ^\& 



j^jP o4^s 

<3^^ l \y^^\j =L bfjp\j 

o^t ^£/§ ^iy*T 


00 X L ^-» - -£ 


The Confederates (Surah Al-Ahzab) 

® Themes of the Surah: 

It focuses on Allah’s taking care of His Prophet 
(peace be upon him), and protecting his personage 
and his household. 

® Explanation: 

|jj) O Prophet, remain firm, you and those with you, 
on being Mindful, through carrying out His com¬ 
mands and refraining from His prohibitions, and 
fear Him alone. And do not obey the disbelievers 
and hypocrites in what they desire. Allah is Know¬ 
ing of the plans the disbelievers and hypocrites 
make, and Wise in His creating and managing. 

(jj) And follow the revelation your Lord reveals to 
you. Allah is Aware of what you do. None of that 
escapes Him, and He shall reward you for your ac¬ 
tions. 

(Sj) And rely on Allah alone in all your affairs. And 
He is sufficient as a protector for those of His serv¬ 
ants who trust in Him. 

@ Just as Allah has not placed two hearts in the 
chest of any man, as some of them believe, likewise 
He did not make wives like mothers with respect to 
being forbidden to marry, and likewise He did not 
make claimed sons like biological sons, because 
thihar which is for a man to make his wife unlaw¬ 
ful for himself, and likewise, claiming the children 
of others as one’s own are practices of ignorance 
which Islam has nullified. That making unlaw¬ 
ful through thihar and taking as sons those whose 
fathers you are not is a statement you repeat with 
your mouths, which has no reality. The wife is not 
a mother nor is the claimed son rightfully for the claimant. And Allah says the truth so that His servants practice it, and 
He guides towards the path of truth. 

(ij) Attribute those you claim to be your sons towards their real fathers, because attributing them towards them is justice 
in the eyes of Allah. But if you do not know their fathers to whom you can attribute them, then they are your brothers in 
religion and the sons of your uncles, so call them by: “O brother” or “O cousin”. And there is no sin on you if one of you 
makes a mistake and attributes a claimed son towards his claimant, but you will be sinful if you intentionally say that. 
And Allah is Forgiving to those of His servants who repent, Merciful to them as He did not punish them due to mistakes, 
djj) The Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him) has more right over the believers than their own selves in whatever he 
calls them to, even if they incline towards something else. And his wives are like mothers for all believers, hence it is 
unlawful for any believer to marry any of them after he passes away. 

Relatives are more deserving of one another in inheritance by Allah’s decree than the believers and those who migrated 
for Allah’s cause, who would previously inherit by means of contractual agreement between themselves in the beginning 
of Islam. Then Allah abrogated their inheriting from one another after that. Except if you, O believers, do good towards 
your close associates besides the inheritors, by making a bequest for them and being kind to them, then that is your right. 
That is a decree inscribed in the Preserved Tablet. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. There is nobody above being commanded to good and forbidden from evil. 

2. Likening wives to mothers is a grave evil and lie. 

3. It is unlawful to claim a child as one’s own. 4. Accountability for unintentional mistakes has been removed from this 
nation. 

5. It is necessary to give preference to what the Prophet commands (peace be upon him) before one’s own desires. 

6. The high status of the wives of the Prophet (peace be upon him) and the unlawfulness of marrying them after him, as 
they are the mothers of the believers. 

7. All blood relatives are legitimate inheritors. 


Part 21 



















cyu I 

tLJ) L>\ \& o^^ 

4^1 oV^==^Ljif5-^ ^-€r$^ VSXn^3V^ S£4~ 

lP 2 ^ Cy<j^4j^ C& Jl? ^W* il(£) ^yy^. oJC^J^C^ 

\ cup\) ilj 


^ jj jj> f-^Lg c^\^( ^ Ij^x1^^^\j f^^jj 

^5 ^ ^ $ **■ T^ ^ 9 -? ' ^ < ~s [ 

jj> 

^JjAI^cJ\S 4jk\ ^Acj 15 ' 

2 £ 'T >J . »>" ^ » 2 "\ ** \ *C ^ sTf ^ '“T ^ ^ ,- v ■» f 9 * 

C$^O q )^\JLO/ 

^>-4^i 
\j*j{}J$\ lyi {^]31^N i 


Al-Ahzab 419 Part 21 



(0) O Messenger, remember when I took a firm 
covenant from the prophets that they will worship 
Allah alone and not associate any partner with Him, 
and that they will convey the revelation sent to 
them. And I have taken it especially from you, and 
from Noah, Abraham, Moses, Jesus son of Mary. 
I have taken a firm covenant from them to fulfil 
the conveying of Allah’s messages they have been 
entrusted with. 

jj) Allah took this firm covenant from the prophets 
so He can ask the truthful Messengers regarding 
their truthfulness, to silence the disbelievers, and 
Allah has prepared for those who disbelieve in Him 
and His Messengers a painful punishment on the 
Day of Judgment, and it is the fire of hell. 

@ O those who have faith in Allah and practice 
what He has legislated, remember Allah’s favour on 
you when the armies of the disbelievers came to 
Madina, prepared to fight you, and the hypocrites 
and Jews supported them. Then I sent upon them 
the eastern winds through which the Prophet (peace 
be upon him) was helped, and I sent armies of an¬ 
gels you did not see. Then the disbelievers turned 
away fleeing, not being able to do anything. And 
Allah is Seeing what you do. None of that is hidden 
from Him and He shall reward you for that. 

@ And that was when the disbelievers came to 
you from the top of the valley and from the bottom, 
from the East and West, when the eyes turned away 
from everything besides seeing the enemy and the 
hearts reached the throats due to intense fear. And 
you were thinking different thoughts regarding Al¬ 
lah. At times you were thinking of help and at time 


you were thinking of losing hope from Him. 

@> In that position in the Battle of the Trench, the believers were tested through the enemies. 

@) On that day, the hypocrites and those of weak faith, whose hearts contain doubts said: “The promise of Allah and his 
messenger for victory and being established on this land is false and baseless.” 

@ O Messenger, remember when a group of hypocrites said to the people of Madina: “O people of Yathrib (the name for 
Madina before Islam), there is no stability for you by the peak of Silah near the trench, so return to your homes”. And a 
group of them was seeking permission from the Prophet (peace be upon him) to return to their homes, claiming that their 
homes were exposed to the enemy, but they were not exposed as they claimed. They were only seeking to flee from their 
enemy through this false excuse. 

{§} And if the enemy were to enter upon them in Madina from all its sides and ask them to return to disbelieving and as¬ 
sociating partners with Allah, they would grant their enemy this, and they would not lag behind from becoming renegade 
and turning back towards disbelief except a little. 

@ And these hypocrites had promised Allah after they fled from fighting on the occasion of Uhud that if Allah were to 
make them witness another battle, they will definitely fight their enemy and not flee out of fear. However, they broke 
their promise. And the servant is responsible for the promise he made to Allah and he will soon be questioned about it. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The Messengers of Resolve have a special status. 

2. Allah helps His believing servants when difficulties befall. 

3. The test which the believers went through in the Battle of the Trench was great. 

4. The hypocrites desert the believers during tribulations. 

5. False claims and breaking pacts is a quality of the hypocrites. 

















@ O Messenger, say to these people: “Fleeing will 
never benefit you if you flee from fighting, out of 
fear of death or being killed, because the appoint¬ 
ed times are fixed, and fighting do not bring them 
closer nor does fleeing distance them. And if you 
do flee and your time has not come, you will not be 
able to enjoy life except for a short while”. 

(jp O Messenger, say to them: “Who can save you 
from Allah if He intends for you the death or being 
killed you dislike, or He intends for you the safety 
and good you hope for? There is nobody to save 
you from that”. And these hypocrites will not find 
for themselves any associate besides Allah to take 
care of their affairs, nor any helper to save them 
from Allah punishing them. 

@ Allah knows those of you who hold others back 
from fighting alongside Allah’s Messenger (peace 
be upon him) and those who say to their brothers: 

“Come to us and do not fight alongside him, lest 
you get killed, because we fear you will get killed”. 

And these forsaken people do not come to battle or 
participate in it except rarely, to remove blame from 
themselves, not to help Allah and His Messenger. 

Cj) O group of believers, they are miserly with 
you with their wealth, so they do not help you by 
spending it; miserly with their souls, so they do not 
fight alongside you; and miserly with their love, so 
they do not love you. Then when fear at the time of 
meeting the enemy comes, you will see them look¬ 
ing at you, O Messenger, with their eyes rolling 
out of cowardice, just as the eyes of a person who 
is suffering the pangs of death roll. But when fear 
leaves them and they become content, they harm 
you verbally with abusive sharp tongues. They are greedy for booty which they look for. Those who have been described 
with these qualities have not truly believed, so Allah cancelled the reward of their actions. And this cancelling was easy 
for Allah. 

(jp These cowards think the coalition conspiring to fight Allah’s Messenger (peace be upon him) and fight the believers 
will never leave until they totally destroy the believers. And if it is decreed that the coalition come another time, these 
cowardly hypocrites will wish they were not in Madina, but rather they were with the bedouins far from it, asking regard¬ 
ing your news: what happened to you after your enemies fought you? And even if they were amongst you, O believers, 
they would not have fought alongside you except a little, so do not pay attention to them or be sad over them. 

@ There has been for you an excellent example in what Allah’s Messenger said, carried out and practiced, for he present¬ 
ed his own noble self and personally engaged in battle, so how after that can you be miserly with your souls over his soul? 
And only he who is hopeful of the Last Day, works for it and remembers Allah abundantly will follow Allah’s Messenger 
(peace be upon him). As for the one who is not hopeful of the Last Day and does not remember Allah abundantly, he does 
not follow His Messenger (peace be upon him). 

@ When the believers saw the companies which had gathered to fight them, they said: “This is the test, tribulation and 
help Allah and His Messenger promised us, and Allah and His Messenger were true in this, for it has occurred”. And 
seeing the companies did not increase them except in faith and submission to Him. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The appointed times are fixed; fighting cannot bring them closer nor can fleeing from them distance them. 

2. Hindering from striving in Allah’s way in always the condition of the hypocrites. 

3. The hypocrites are few in number at the time of anxiety but many at the time of desiring something. 

4. The hypocrites do not bear worry for the nation. 

5. The Messenger (peace be upon him) is a role model for the believers in his sayings and actions. 

6. Reliance in Allah and submitting to Him is from the qualities of the believers. 



















t Y\ 


j^£\a\<px^ JW^ 

^sy^JS - jo j ^-^-{^2$ 

j _jl <=-L^ ^lOi-^T-'*^\ JyjO_J j±^JJ^y 2^( jlX$Jy^d\ *0$\ 

CfJ&\ £W cJ^YY oL^^Ci^i 

-> ^5 ^ /, ^ O ^ / 0 ^ 

s) Y-4 Y^\jY^ 


cJ^Ji\jL&^X3 <j l3 J&j jJ*l^JL<^>{ jtY^ 




@ Amongst the believers are men who were true 
to Allah, so they fulfilled what they promised Him, 
namely firmness and patience on striving in Allah’s 
way. Amongst them are those who died or were 
killed in Allah’s way and amongst them are those 
who await martyrdom in His way. And these be¬ 
lievers did not change what they promised Allah 
like the hypocrites did with their promises. 

(|§S) So that Allah rewards the truthful who fulfilled 
what they promised Allah, by virtue of their truth 
and fulfilling their promises, and punish the hyp¬ 
ocrites who broke their promises if He wishes, by 
making them die before they repent from their dis¬ 
belief, or by accepting their repentance by enabling 
them to repent. And Allah is Forgiving to one who 
repents for his sins and Merciful to him. 

@ And Allah repelled the disbelieving groups who 
were conspiring to fight the believers and they were 
not successful in totally destroying the believers as 
they intended, losers who were angry due to their 
returning in failure. And Allah sufficed the believ¬ 
ers in fighting them, by the winds He sent and the 
angels He sent down. And Allah is Powerful and 
Mighty; nobody attempts to overpower Allah ex¬ 
cept that He will be left defeated and deserted. 

@ And Allah brought the Jews who helped them 
down from their fortresses in which they would 
protect themselves from their enemy, and Allah put 
fear into their hearts. A group of them you kill, O 
believers, and a group of them you take as captives, 
(jp) And Allah made you owners of their land, along 
with the crops and date trees they contained, after 
destroying them, and He made you owners of their 
homes and other wealth, and He made you owners of the land of Khaybar which you have not yet trodden, but you will 
soon tread on it. This is a promise and good news for the believers. And Allah is Powerful over everything; Nothing is 
outside His ability. 

jjj) O Prophet, say to your wives if they seek an increase in spending but you did not have anything more to spend on 
them: “If you seek the worldly life and the adornment it contains, then let me give you the provisions given to a divorced 
women, and I will let you go in the best of manners without causing harm.” 

(j§) But if you desire the pleasure of Allah and the pleasure of His Messenger, and you seek paradise in the abode of the 
afterlife, remain patient on your condition, for Allah has prepared a great reward for those of you who do good through 
patience and good companionship”. 

@) O wives of the Prophet, whoever amongst you comes with an open sin, her punishment will be doubled on the Day of 
Judgment, due to her status and rank, and to protect the personage of the Prophet (peace be upon him). And this doubling 
is easy for Allah. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The Companions of Allah’s Messenger (peace be upon him) have been commended, which is a great honour for them. 

2. When they are mindful of Allah, His assistance and support come from where they do not expect. 

3. The result of treachery of those who supported the coalition was grievous. 

4. The wives of the Prophet (peace be upon him) choosing Allah and His Messenger is a proof to their strong faith. 


YxY YY 0 ^ 

Ji Is 

gaffij Al-Ahzab 421 p^y , *^~Part21 
























i YY 





1 ^ Jl> ^ aSpV^ cj^-ty* 

c>^j\ cyt-y ^*' -^ ijuJ 

^===^3 ^ ^ jy \ g- 9 

jo^. j 
o\30J3^4^ 



C£y±^)jA^y^\j (1^3 aL^ 5 CJ^yy^J 


@ Whoever from among you obeys Allah and His 
Messenger, and does good deeds which are pleas¬ 
ing to Allah, Allah will grant her double the reward 
all other women get, and will prepare for her a no¬ 
ble reward in the Hereafter, which is Paradise. 

(Sjl O the wives of the Prophet (peace be upon him), 

You are not like other women in terms of privilege 
and nobility; you are on a level of privilege and 
nobility other women can never reach even if they 
were to fulfil the commands of Allah and refrain 
from things He has not allowed. Therefore, do not 
soften your tone when you speak to unrelated men, 
in case those with the disease of hypocrisy or im¬ 
permissible desires begin to lust. Rather, speak in 
a manner well clear of any doubt, by speaking in a 
serious and not trivial tone as necessary. 

@ And remain within your homes; do not leave 
them unless for a need; do not expose your beauty 
like the women who would do so before Islam to at¬ 
tract men; perform prayer to perfection; give Zakat 
of your wealth, and obey Allah and His Messenger. 

O wives of the Messenger of Allah and people of 
His household! Allah (may He be glorified) only 
intends to remove harm from you, and wants to 
purify your souls by adorning them with excellent 
characteristics such that no blemish remains. 

(jp And mention whatever verses of Allah are re¬ 
vealed to His Messenger in your homes, and the 
pure ways of Allah’s Messenger that you observe. 

Indeed, Allah is kind to you by favouring you with 
putting you in the house of His Prophet; He knows 
you well because He chose you as wives for His 
Messenger and as mothers of all the believers from 
his people. 

(j|) Indeed, the males who submit to Allah and the females who submit; the male believers in Allah and the female believ¬ 
ers; the males who obey Allah and the females who obey; the males who are truthful in their belief and their statements 
and the females who are truthful; the males who are patient in obedience, in refraining from sins and during trials and the 
females who are patient; the males who give in obligatory and optional charity from their wealth and the females who 
give in charity; the males who keep obligatory and optional fasts and the females who fast; the males who guard their 
private parts from exposure to those who are forbidden from seeing them and from the immorality of fornication and 
anything leading to it, and the females who guard their private parts; and the males who remember Allah abundantly in 
private and in public and the females who remember Allah, Allah has prepared His special forgiveness for them from their 
sins, and an immense reward on the Day of Judgement which is Paradise. 

4*} Beneficial Points: 

1. The wives of the Prophet (peace be upon him) have virtue over all other women. 

2. From among the guidelines of the Qur’an towards the Muslim woman are: Prohibition of speaking softly and exposing 
beauty publicly, and instruction to remain in the home except when necessary. 

3. The virtue of the members of the household of the Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him), and his wives. 

4. Men and women are alike as regards to faith and good deeds, except for some deeds which the legislator has excluded 
for each gender (taking into consideration the unique natures of each). 




■O ^ _ 

A3 

A\AXX"A\ .. X.\f" 



























@ It is not correct for a believing man or woman 
when Allah and His Messenger decide a matter for 
them that they have a choice in accepting or reject¬ 
ing it. Whoever disobeys Allah and His Messenger 
has clearly deviated from the straight path. 

@ O Messenger! When you said to the one whom 
Allah had blessed with the bounty of Islam, and you 
had favoured with freeing him - the person intend¬ 
ed here is Zayd bin Harithah may Allah be pleased 
with him - when he came to you seeking counsel 
in divorcing his wife Zaynab bint Jahsh, you said 
to him, “Keep your wife; do not divorce her, and 
be mindful of Allah by fulfilling His commands 
and refraining from the things He has not allowed” 
whilst, O Messenger, you were hiding within your 
heart that which Allah was going to expose: that 
Zayd should divorce her and He would command 
you to marry her. You were fearing the people and 
did not express that which you knew, when Allah 
is more deserving of your fear than the people. So 
when Zayd disinclined from her, and was happy at 
heart with divorcing her, he divorced her and I mar¬ 
ried you to her, so that there would be no sin on the 
believers if they were to marry the wives of their 
adopted sons after they had divorced them. Allah’s 
command will always come to pass, nothing can 
stop or obstruct it. 

(J§|) There is no sin or oppression on the Prophet 
(peace be upon him) in his marriage to the wife of 
his adopted son which Allah made permissible for 
him. In fact, in doing so, he is following in the way 
of the Prophets before him; he is not any different 
to the messengers in that regard. The Prophet had 
no choice in the completion of this marriage and nullifying of adoption that Allah decreed; it was a decree which was to 
pass, there was no one who could overturn it. 

These Prophets who convey the messages of Allah that are revealed to them to their nations, and do not fear anyone 
except Allah (may He be glorified), they do not pay attention to what others say when they do whatever Allah has per¬ 
mitted for them. Allah is sufficient as a guardian for the actions of His servants so that He may take them to account over 
them and requite them; if they are good then with good, if evil then with punishment. 

@ Muhammad is not the father of any of your men, so he is not the father of Zayd, therefore his marrying his wife is not 
impermissible for him when Zayd divorces her. However, he is the Messenger of Allah sent to the people and the seal of 
the prophets: there is no prophet to come after him. Allah is the knower of everything, nothing is hidden from Him from 
the affairs of His servants. 

@ O those who have faith in Allah and do whatever He has legislated for them! Remember Allah abundantly with your 
hearts, tongues and limbs. 

@ And exalt Him by glorifying Him (saying Subhanallah) and proclaiming His oneness (La ilaha illallah) at the start and 
the end the day, because of their virtue and the ease in remembering Allah through them. 

@ He is the one who showers mercy upon you and praises you, and His angels pray for you that He removes you from 
the darkness of disbelief into the light of faith. And Allah is merciful to the believers, so He does not punish them when 
they obey Him by fulfilling His command and refrain from what He has prohibited. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. It is obligatory for a believer to submit to the decree of Allah and humble himself to it. 

2. Allah is aware of whatever is in the hearts. 

3. From among the virtues of the mother of the believers Zaynab bint Jahsh is: Allah fulfilled her marriage contract from 
above the seven heavens. 

4. The virtue of remembering Allah a lot, especially in the morning an evening. 










AJ) 


I ** 






Al-Ahzab 


Part 22 

















@ The greeting of the believers on the day they 
meet their Lord will be one of peace and security 
from all evil, And Allah has already prepared for 
them a generous reward, Paradise as a recompense 
for them obeying His commandments and staying 
away from His prohibitions. 

@ O Prophet! Indeed, I have sent you to the people 
as a witness against them that you convey to them 
the message; as a giver of glad tidings to the believ¬ 
ers of the Paradise I have prepared for them, and as 
a wamer for the disbelievers of the punishment I 
have prepared for them. 

@ And I have sent you as a caller to the sole wor¬ 
ship and obedience of Allah, and towards obedi¬ 
ence to His command. I have also sent you as an 
illuminating lantern from which every person seek¬ 
ing guidance can take light. 

@ And inform the believers in Allah who do 
whatever Allah legislated for them, of something 
that will please them: that they will have a great 
privilege from Allah (may He be glorified), which 
includes Allah helping them in the world and them 
succeeding in the Hereafter by entering Paradise. 

(Sj| And do not obey the disbelievers and the hyp¬ 
ocrites in their call to preventing people from the 
religion of Allah, and turn away from them; per¬ 
haps that will be more effective in them believing 
in what you have brought to them. And rely on Al¬ 
lah in all your matters, of which is His helping you 
against your enemies. Allah is sufficient as a guard¬ 
ian the servants can rely upon in all their affairs in 
the world and the Hereafter. 

|j§) O those who have faith in Allah and do whatev¬ 
er Allah has legislated for them! When you tie the knot of marriage with believing women, and then you divorce them 
before consummating the marriage with them, they are not required to go through the waiting period for you, regardless 
of whether it is through menstrual cycles or by counting months. This is because their wombs being free is known due 
to you having not consummated marriage with them. Also, give them some compensation according to your financial 
situations to console their broken emotions as a result of divorce, and clear the way for them to return to their families 
without causing them any inconvenience. 

O Prophet! I have made permissible for you those of your wives whom you have given their dowry to, and those 
female servants that you possess from the captives Allah has given to you as booty. I have also made permissible for you, 
marriage to the daughters of your paternal uncles and aunts and the daughters of your maternal uncles and aunts, who 
have emigrated with you. I have also made permissible for you to marry the believing woman who presents herself to you 
for marriage without any dowry. The permissibility of this type of marriage, without a dowry, is exclusive to the prophet 
(peace be upon him), and is not permissible to anyone else from his Nation. Verily, I know what I have made obligatory 
upon the believers with regards to their wives: it is not permissible for them to marry more than four women at once. I 
am also aware of legislating for them with regards to their female servants: that they can make use of however many they 
want without any restriction on number. And I have also permitted for you from the aforementioned that which I have not 
made permissible for others, so that there is no difficulty or difficulty upon you. Allah Forgiving to those of His servants 
who repent, and is merciful to them. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Being patient upon harm is one of the qualities of successful callers towards Allah. 2. It is permissible to divorce a 
woman before consummating the marriage. 3. There is no waiting period for a woman who has been divorced before her 
marriage was consummated. 4. It is preferable for the husband to give the wife he has just divorced before consummating 
the marriage, some wealth as a consolation. 5. The Prophet (peace be upon him) was privileged by it being permissible 
for him to marry a woman who had presented herself to him unreservedly without dowry, although he did not take up 
the privilege. 




m 




>43 


XjO-v 


I 



















@ O Messenger! Defer the turn of whichever of 
your wives you wish to defer by not spending the 
night with her when it is her turn that you do, and 
spend the night with whichever of your wives you 
wish. And there is no sin on you should you wish 
to spend the night with the one whose turn you de¬ 
ferred. This choice and broadening your options for 
you is more effective in making you the coolness of 
the eyes of your wives and in them being pleased 
with whatever you give all of them, because they 
know that you have not left out an obligation or 
have not fulfilled a right. O Men! Allah knows the 
inclination of your hearts towards some of your 
wives over others; Allah is the knower of the ac¬ 
tions of His servants, nothing from them is hidden 
from Him. He is also forbearing; He does not pun¬ 
ish them immediately in case they repent to Him. 
@ O Messenger! It is not permissible for you to 
marry women other than your wives who are al¬ 
ready in your protection, neither is it permissible 
for you to divorce them, or divorce any one of them 
so that you may marry another woman, even if her 
beauty appeals to you. However, it is permissible 
for you to take captive women into your posses¬ 
sion. And Allah is a guardian over everything. This 
ruling proves the virtue of the mothers of the be¬ 
lievers, because the Prophet peace be upon him was 
prohibited from divorcing them and marrying oth¬ 
ers whilst he was married to them. 


do not come too early so you end up sitting for longer than needed, waiting for the food to be cooked, rather when you are 
invited, then enter and after you have eaten, return. Do not remain behind socialising with each other, because remaining 
behind causes inconvenience to the Prophet (peace be upon him) and he feels embarrassed to ask you to leave, but Allah 
is not embarrassed to command you to do what is right, and so he has commanded you leave so that you do not cause 
inconvenience to him (peace be upon him) by staying for too long. And when you ask for something from the wives of 
the Prophet (peace be upon him) i.e. utensils etc. then ask from behind a veil, not face to face, in a manner that you cannot 
see them with your eyes. This is to protect them due to the stature of the Messenger of Allah. Asking from behind a veil 
is purer for your hearts and their hearts, so that Satan cannot influence your hearts through whispers and beautifying evil. 
And O believers! It is not befitting for you to cause inconvenience to the Messenger of Allah by remaining behind to 
socialise, nor that you marry his wives after he has passed away, because they are the wives of the believers and it is not 
permissible for anyone to marry his mother. Indeed, that causing inconvenience - of which is your marrying his wives 
after his death - is forbidden and regarded as a great sin by Allah. 

{j§5 If you reveal any of your actions or keep them to yourselves secretly, none of them are hidden to Allah anyway. In¬ 
deed, Allah knows everything none of your actions or anything else is hidden from Him, and He will requite you for your 
deeds: if good then with good, and if evil then with bad. 

Beneficial Points: 

1. Allah is most knowledgeable and the most forbearing. 

2. It is obligatory to maintain good manners with the Messenger (peace be upon him) by not entering his houses without 
permission, and not remaining too long after eating upon his invitation. 

3. Bashfulness is one of the qualities of the Prophet (peace be upon him). 

4. It is necessary to maintain the stature of the mothers of the believers from the wives of the Prophet peace be upon him. 

5. It is forbidden to marry the mothers of the believers after the demise of the Prophet (peace be upon him). 


O those who have faith in Allah and do whatev¬ 
er Allah has legislated for them! Do not enter the 
houses of the Prophet except after he has given you 
permission to enter by inviting you for food. And 




tYo 




vj4-'| / ** 



I z\)j (J* j 

{^) tLAp o! 

Al-Ahzab 425 Part 22 





















1 


Itrnl 




cSjfeL^l SL? (If&J^-^fXZj) 

\ "jS Aju \j i^Lol 
<3^j^-^==u3i^ 4^i\ 510 

^ __ /^__^- ^ O KJ 0 'o' 0 J 

C)j ^3t. Cfi~y ^ ' £• 

^15 ^T 



@ There is no sin on the wives of the Messenger if 
their fathers, sons, brothers, nephews, from lineage 
or breast feeding, see them and talk to them with¬ 
out a veil. And there is no sin on them if believing 
women or the servants they possess talk to them 
without a veil. O believing women! Be mindful of 
Allah in whatever He (may He be glorified) has 
commanded you to do and prohibited you from, be¬ 
cause He is Watchful over what you do. 

@ Indeed, Allah showers praise upon the Messen¬ 
ger Muhammad (peace be upon him) to His angels, 
and His angels supplicate for him. O those who 
have faith in Allah and do whatever He has legis¬ 
lated for His servants! Send salutations upon the 
Messenger and pray for peace for him abundantly. 
After Allah commanded revering the Messenger 
(peace be upon him) and sending salutations upon 
him, He forbids causing him inconvenience, by 
saying: 

@ Indeed, those who attempt to bring harm to Al¬ 
lah and His messenger through speech or action, 
Allah will distance them from the vastness of His 
mercy in the world and the Hereafter, and He has 
prepared a humiliating punishment for them in the 
Hereafter. 

(S§|) And as for those who cause the male and female 
believers inconvenience through speech or actions, 
without them having committed any wrong i.e. a 
crime that necessitates punishment, they have in¬ 
deed, taken up the burden of clear slander and sin. 

O Prophet! Say to your wives and your daugh¬ 
ters, and the wives of the believers: “Let your outer 


garments you wear hang loosely over you so that 
your bodies are not revealed to unrelated men.” That is more likely to distinguish them as free women so that they are 
not subject to harassment like the servant girls are. And Allah Forgiving of the sins of whichever of His servants repents, 
and He is merciful to them. 

{Jp) The hypocrites who conceal their disbelief and outwardly show Islam, whose hearts are transgressive in nature by 
being attached to their desires, and who spread false information in Al-Madlnah to create disunity among the believers, if 
they do not stop their hypocrisy, O Messenger, I will definitely command you to punish them and impose a punishment 
upon them. Then, they will not be able to live in Al-Madlnah with you except for a short while, because of their destruc¬ 
tion or exile as a result of their causing corruption on Earth. 

@ They are exiled from the mercy of Allah; in whatever place they are found they will be seized and eliminated because 
of their hypocrisy and spreading corruption on Earth. 

@ This is the divine custom of Allah that is in force regarding the hypocrites when they reveal their hypocrisy. And the 
custom of Allah is permanent; you will never find any change in it. 

Beneficial Points: 

1. The lofty high status of the prophet (peace be upon him) in the sight of Allah and His angels. 

2. It is forbidden to cause inconvenience to the Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him) in any way or form, to him 
personally or to his family members. 

3. It is forbidden to cause inconvenience to the believers without reason. 

4. Hypocrisy is a cause of punishment afflicting the hypocrite. 





















dijJ JoUjA oLh]\ 

Ac-Vj 4^t 5)0 Ci^ Q_^ AC-LHil 

^ J* 4 r^ 

4 ^i\ \jjlis>\ ^ <■ LLLflJ | 

<-j>\Xj>&\ c£ ijuJu^ ^>\2j {^) \ iSjL^ll 

O^jI Oi,iJ \ Qj\S 

($) ^&~3 4^ JC^ 6 ^J ly \S\jL 5 . 

* S’ "K ^ s' *t> o 0 •<’,0 0 ^t 

oy^ Wi^5 

jdl>4^ *&\j^c^j^-iy jj^===4j-£^j jj3j«£A ^3 

c^jL^S Jp l \55>c-\3)0 L-j^L^L^ Ais 

o' 5£l^ 5154 -!j ofl>^ )j 



(jp O Messenger! The idolaters ask you in denial 
and rejection, and the Jews also ask you, regarding 
the final hour: “When will it occur?” Say to them: 
“The knowledge of the hour is with Allah; I have 
no knowledge of it.” O Messenger! What do you 
know, the hour could be near! 
ijp) Indeed, Allah (may He be glorified) has exiled 
the disbelievers from His mercy, and prepared a 
flaring fire that awaits them on the Day of Judge¬ 
ment. 

(j§S) They will remain in the punishment of that fire 
forever. They will not find a guardian that benefits 
them in it, nor a helper who protects them from its 
punishment. 

@ On the Day of Judgement their faces will be 
turned in the hellfire, and they will say out of se¬ 
vere regret and remorse: “If only we obeyed Allah 
by doing what He commanded us to and refrained 
from the things He prohibited us from, and obeyed 
the Messenger in what he brought from his Lord!” 
@ These people will come up with a false, weak 
excuse when they will say: “O our Lord! Indeed, 
we obeyed our leaders and the elders of our tribes 
and they led us astray from the straight path.” 

“Our Lord! Give these leaders and elders who 
led us astray from the straight path double the pun¬ 
ishment you have given us because of their leading 
us astray, and exile them from your mercy com¬ 
pletely.” 


0 'Cep 


@ O those who have faith in Allah and do whatev- 
er Allah has legislated for them! Do not cause your 
1 T^k Messenger inconvenience like those who caused 
Moses inconvenience by saying that his testicles were inflamed, and so Allah cleared him of their allegations, and his in¬ 
nocence from their accusations of him became clear to them. Moses is highly ranked according to Allah; his supplications 
were not rejected, nor were his efforts in vain. 

Cj) O those who have faith in Allah and do whatever Allah has legislated for them! Be mindful of Allah by fulfilling His 
commands and refrain from that which He has prohibited, and speak correctly and truthfully. 

@ Indeed, if you are mindful of Allah and speak correctly, Allah will rectify your deeds for you, accept them from you, 
wipe away your sins from you and not take you to account over them. Whoever obeys Allah and His Messenger has suc¬ 
ceeded so greatly no other success can match it: it is the success of acquiring the pleasure of Allah and entering Paradise. 
@ Indeed, I presented to the heavens, the earth and to the mountains the obligation to adhere to religion and guarding 
of wealth and secrets. They all refuse to bear the obligation, fearing the outcome of doing so, but the human accepted to 
carry it. Indeed, the human is oppressive to himself and ignorant of the outcome of carrying such a burden. 

@ The human carried it as per the decree of Allah, so that Allah could then punish the male and female hypocrites and 
idolaters for their hypocrisy and ascribing partners with Allah, and so that He could forgive the believing men and women 
who carried the burden of obligation well. And Allah Forgiving of the sins of His servants who repent and is merciful to 
them. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The knowledge of the hour is exclusive to Allah. 

2. The disbeliever will severely regret his disbelief and negligence on the Day of Judgement. 

3. The followers shifting the responsibility of their deviance to their superiors will not absolve them of accountability. 

4. The prohibition of causing inconvenience to the Prophets through speech or action is severe. 

5. Being mindful of Allah and speaking the truth is a means of entering Paradise and being safe from the hellfire. 

6. The heavy responsibility/burden on the shoulders of mankind. 



























ac\^S\ Cjjj\5V ouJ'f 3^3 0 l5>*jJ\ 

J\i£a JUj ^3jS 


>X\S)3 o^^ ? ' 1 ^5 J0$^£$3 c/f>J^\ l| Jl 3 i 

==> 


Surah Saba’ (Sheba) 

® Themes of the Surah: 

The manifestation of Allah’s power and ability to 
change the conditions and states of people and the 
condition of humankind between gratitude and in¬ 
gratitude. 

^Explanation: 

jj} All praise belongs to Allah to whom belongs 
everything that is in the heavens and everything 
that is on Earth, by way of being His creation, in 
His ownership and under His control. And for Him 
is all praise in the Hereafter; He is the Wise in His 
creation and management, and the Knower of the 
conditions of His servants. Nothing is hidden from 
Him. 

(Jp He knows everything that enters the earth, i.e. 
water, seeds and minerals; He knows whatever 
comes out of it i.e. plants etc.; He knows whatev¬ 
er descends from the heavens i.e. rain, angels and 
sustenance, and He knows whatever ascends to the 
heavens i.e. angels, the deeds of His servants and 
their souls. He is merciful to His believing serv¬ 
ants and forgiving of the sins of whoever repents 
to Him. 

Those who disbelieved in Allah said, “The hour 
will never come to us!” O Messenger! Say to them: 

“No, by Allah, the very hour that you reject will 
definitely come to you, but its time is only known 
to Allah. He (may He be glorified) is the knower 
of whatever is hidden such as the hour, even the 
equivalent of the smallest ant is not hidden from 
His knowledge, nor anything smaller than that in 
the heavens or on Earth or larger, except that it is recorded in a clear book, which is the Preserved Tablet in which 
everything that is to happen until the Day of Judgement is recorded.” 

© Allah has recorded everything He has in the Preserved Tablet so that He may requite those who have faith in Him and 
do good deeds. They will receive forgiveness from Allah for their sins; He will not take them to account for them, and 
they will receive generous sustenance on the Day of Judgement, which is His Paradise. 

Cp As for those who strove to falsify all the verses Allah revealed, and said regarding them, “It is sorcery!” and said 
regarding My Messenger, “He is a fortune-teller, a sorcerer, and a poet”, they will receive the worst and severest punish¬ 
ment on the Day of Judgement. 

(Sj) Some scholars of the people of the book i.e. Abdullah bin Salam testify that the revelation Allah revealed to you is 
the truth without doubt, and it guides towards the path of the Almighty whom no one can beat and who is praiseworthy 
in the world and the Hereafter. 

$ Those who disbelieved in Allah say to one another in astonishment and mocking whatever the Messenger (peace be 
upon him) brought, “Shall we lead you to a man who will tell you that when you die and decompose into pieces, you will 
be resurrected alive again?!” 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The knowledge of Allah is vast and encompasses everything. 

2. It is permissible to emphasise information by taking an oath in front of one who denies it. 

3. The people of knowledge have a virtue. 

4. The idolaters’ rejection of resurrection is a rejection of the power of Allah who created them. 




0 * 


























ij^\^ Jpc£/^1 

o^L* C£) ^ \ cJ 

^ J^yJL^^llS oio^^li ^UJSJ \ 05 
Z0J2J& 

l^j \JL* 3 L>JO^ * 0 s^-6-^ > ^^lV^ == 4 

^ ^9 .* ^5 o ^9 ^ ^ ^ ^ 


| ^S<.0%& ^ gg^ ® And they said, “Has this man fabricated and 
attributed a lie to Allah, claiming that we shall be 
resurrected after we die, or is he insane, talking of 
nonsense?” It is not as these people say, rather, the 
reality is that those who do not believe in the Here¬ 
after will suffer a severe punishment on the Day 
of Judgement, and are very far astray in the world, 
jj} Do these rejectors of resurrection not see the 
earth that is in front of them and the sky that is 
above them? If I wished the earth beneath their 
feet to swallow them up, I would have caused it 
to happen; and if I wished to send down portions/ 
pieces of the punishment from the heavens, I would 
have done so. Indeed, there is a clear sign in that for 
every repentant servant through which he witnesses 
gg^ the power of Allah. The One capable of doing that, 
is also capable of resurrecting you after your death 
„ y-' ^ ^ and the decomposition of your bodies. 

J) And verily I granted David (peace be upon him) 


05iLjwA-aJo 

533^3)^1^ j5_3 

jjOif 


2A_ J 


^lS ^ ^ 

I C^i* ^4^ ol Xj^\ 


messengership and a kingdom, and I said to the 
mountains, ”0 Mountains! Echo My glorification 
together with David.” and I said the same to the 
birds. I also made iron soft for him so that he could 
make whatever tools he wanted with it. 

@ O David! Make an expansive armour which 
will protect your soldiers from the attacks of their 
enemies, and make the rivets in proportion to the 
rings so that they are not too fine such that do not 
lodge in them, nor too thick such that they do not fit 
in them either. And do good deeds; I am watching 
over your actions, none of your actions are hidden 
from Me and I shall requite you for them. 

@ And I made the wind serviceable to Solomon, 
son of David. It would blow the distance of a month in a morning, and the same distance in an evening. I also made 
springs of copper flow for him so that he could make whatever he wanted from it, together with employing the Jinn who 
would work in front of him by the command of his Lord. Whichever of the Jinn would deviate from whatever I command¬ 
ed it to do, I would make it taste the punishment of a flaring fire. 

{Jp These Jinn constructed for him whatever he wanted from places of worship, palaces, lofty structures. And I said to 
them: O the family of David! Be grateful for the blessings I have bestowed upon you, because very few of My servants 
are grateful to Me for the blessings I grant them. 

@ When we decreed for Solomon to die, the Jinn did not realise he had passed away until the woodworms had eroded 
away the staff he was leaning on. When he fell it became clear to the Jinn that they do not know the unseen/ghayb, as if 
they did, they would have not remained subdued, continuing to carry out the difficult tasks imposed upon them. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Allah honoured His Prophet David with messengership and kingship; by making the mountains and birds echo His 
glorification, and by softening iron for him. 

2. Allah honoured His Prophet Solomon (peace be upon him) with messengership and rule. 

3. The blessings of Allah require gratitude to be shown for them. 

4. Knowledge of the Ghaib is exclusive to Allah, so there is no basis in the claim that the Jinn or anyone else know any¬ 
thing from the Ghaib. 
















After Allah mentioned the blessings He bestowed 
upon David and his son Solomon (peace be upon 
them). He mentions the blessings He bestowed 
upon the people of Sheba, with the difference being 
that David and Solomon (peace be upon them) were 
grateful, and the people of Sheba were ungrateful to 
Him. He says: 

@ There was for the tribe of Sheba, in the dwelling 
they lived in, a clear sign of Allah’s power and His 
favour on them, and the clear sign was two gardens: 
one on the right and the second on the left. And I 
said to them: “Eat of the provision of your Lord 
and thank Him for His favours. This is a pleasant 
city and you Lord, Allah is a forgiving Lord, who 
absolves the sins of those who repent to Him.” 

@ But they turned away from thanking Allah and 
believing in His messengers, so I punished them by 
turning their favours into difficulties, then I sent 
upon them a strong flood which destroyed their 
damn and flooded their fields. And I replaced their 
two pleasant gardens with two gardens which gave 
bitter fruit, and which contained fruitless tamarisk 
trees and a small amount of the lote tree (sidr). 

(@ That change which occurred to the favours they 
were on was because of their disbelief and turning 
away from being thankful for the favours. And I do 
not punish so severely except one who rejects Al¬ 
lah’s favours. 

@ And I made between the people of Sheba in 
Yemen and between the cities of the blessed land 
of Levant, many neighbouring cities, making easi¬ 
er for them the distance of travelling, so they may 
pass through these cities and towns, stopping when 
needed, without any difficulty until they reach the land of Levant. And we announced: “Travel through them day and 
night in complete security from any enemy, hunger or thirst”. 

@ But they arrogantly rejected Allah’s favour of facilitating their journey and they said: “Our Lord, make our journeys 
longer by removing those cities in between so that we can have a taste of the exhaustion of travelling, and we can make 
clear the excellence of our riding mounts”. And they wronged themselves by arrogantly rejecting Allah’s favour, turning 
away from thanking Him, so I made them into tales which those after them talk of and I totally separated between them in 
the lands so they cannot reach each other. In that which has been mentioned, namely favouring the people of Sheba and 
taking retribution from them, is a lesson for every person who is patient in is obediance to Allah, and bearing what he has 
been afflicted with, who is thankful for Allah’s favours on him. 

@) And Iblis confirmed through them what he assumed i.e., that he is able to lead them astray and misguide them from 
the truth, so they followed him in disbelief and misguidance except a group of the believers, as they ruined his hope by 
not following him. 

(Sj) And Iblis has no power over them through which he can force them to be misguided, but he only beautifies for them 
to entice them to lead them astray. We have given him permission to entice so we can make it clear the one who has 
faith in the Hereafter from the one who is in doubt about the Hereafter. And your Lord, O Messenger, is a Guardian over 
everything. He guards the actions of His servants and will reward them for them. @ Say - O Messenger, to these idola¬ 
ters: “Call upon those whom you claimed were your Allahs besides Allah, so that they can bring you benefit or remove 
harm from you. They do not have ownership of anything, even as small as a dust particle, nor are they partners with 
Allah in ownership, nor does Allah have any helpers from amongst them. He is Self Sufficient, in no need of anyone else. 
® Beneficial Points: 

1. Gratitude protects favours and rejecting them causes them to be seized. 

2. Safety is one of the greatest favours Allah has given the servants. 

3. Correct faith protects against following the misguidance of the satan, through the permission of Allah. 

4. The invalidity of the causes of idolatry and its openings are clear, such as claiming the idols have power or partnership 
will Allah, or help or intercession with Allah. 




tr* 




[ 




Saba’ 


430 


Part 22 

















@ And intercession in His presence does not ben¬ 
efit except for one whom Allah gives permission, 
and Allah does not give permission to intercede ex¬ 
cept for whom He is pleased, due to His greatness. 
And part of His greatness is that when He speaks in 
the heavens, the angels flap their wings in submis¬ 
sion to what He says, until when the state of fear 
dissappears from their hearts some of them say to 
others: “What did your Lord just say?” The angels 
reply He said the truth, and He is High in His es¬ 
sence, and subduing, the Great. 

Say - O Messenger, to these idolaters: “Who 
provides you from the skies by bringing out the 
crops, plants and fruits?” Say: “It is Allah who pro¬ 
vides you. O idolaters! only one of us can be rightly 
guided with the other on clear misguidance. There 
can be no doubt that the believers are on clear guid¬ 
ance and the idolaters are misguided.” 

O Messenger! Say to them: “You will not be 
asked on the day of judgment about the sins we 
committed nor will we be asked about what you 
used to do”. 

Say to them: “Allah will gather us and you on 
the day of judgment, then He will judge between 
us and you with justice, then He will manifest the 
truthful from the liar, and He is the Judge who ad¬ 
judicates with justice, the all Knowing of how to 
pass judgment. 

@ O Messenger! Say to them: “Show me those 
whom you have made for Allah as partners which 
you associate with Him in worship. No indeed, the 
matter is not as you have thought, i.e, that He has 
partners, but rather He is Allah, the Mighty whom 


nobody can overpower, Wise in his creation, decree, and control.”. 

jjjS) And I did not send you, O Messenger, except for the sake of all of mankind, to give good news to the pious that for 
them is Paradise, and to warn the disbelievers and transgressors of the fire, but most people do not know that. Had they 
known, they would not have denied you. 

(j§) And the idolaters say, whilst hastily seeking the punishment you are warning them of: “If you are truthful tell us When 
is this promise of punishment going to occur?” 

{jp O Messenger! Say to these people who are hastily seeking the punishment: “For you is a fixed appointed time, when 
the time comes upon you it will not be delayed or preceded for the smallest moment of time. And this day is the day of 
judgment”. 

@ Those who disbelieved in Allah said: “We will never believe in the Qur’an which Muhammad claim is revealed to 
him nor will we ever believe in the previous divine books”. And if you were to see, O Messenger, when the wrongdoers 
are detained before their Lord on the day of judgment for the reckoning. They will dispute with one another, each one 
placing the responsibility and blame on the other. The subjects/citizens who were subdued will say to their leaders who 
oppressed them in this life: “If you had not led us astray, we would have been believers in Allah and His messengers”. 
^ Beneficial Points: 

1. Softness with the one being called is necessary so that he does not resort to stubbornness and being unreasonable. 

2. The messengership of the Prophet (peace be upon him) incorporates the whole of mankind and j inns likewise. 

3. One of the conditions of the people on the day of judgment will be arguments between the followers and leaders, and 
each side disassociating themselves from the other. 





























CLt^ J ($) 


@ The leaders who were arrogant to the truth will 
say to the followers they oppressed: “Did we stop 
you from the guidance which Muhammad brought? 

No, but rather you were the wrongdoers and the 
people who were corrupt spreading immorality.” 

@ The followers who were oppressed by their 
leaders will say to their leaders who were arrogant 
to the truth: “But your scheming about us night and 
day stopped us from guidance, when you would 
order us to disbelieve in Allah and to worship cre¬ 
ations besides Him”. And they will hide the regret 
over the disbelief they were on in this world when 
they see the punishment, and they will know they 
are going to be punished. And I will put chains on 
the necks of the disbelievers. They will not be given 
this reward except for what they used to do in the 
world, namely worshipping others besides Allah 
and committing sins. 

To console the Messenger (peace be upon him) 
when his people denied him, Allah reminded that 
denial was the practice of nations before him. He 
said: 

@ I have not sent a messenger in any city to warn 
of Allah’s punishment except that the affluent peo¬ 
ple in it amongst those of power, fame and wealth 
said: “We are of what you have been sent with, O 
messengers, disbelievers”. 

And these people of fame said braggingly and 
boastfully: “We are more in wealth and more in 
children. And your claim that we will be punished 
is a lie, as we will not be punished in this world nor 
in the Hereafter”. 

O Messenger, say to these who have been de¬ 
ceived by the favours they have been given: “My Lord expands provision for whom He wants, to test whether he is 
grateful or ungrateful, and He makes it tight for whom He wants, to test whether he is patient or becomes upset. But most 
people do not know that Allah is Wise. He does not decree a matter except due to complete wisdom which is known to 
those who know and which the ignorant are unaware of’. 

@ And your wealth and your children which you boast over are not what leads you to Allah’s pleasure, but the one who 
believes in Allah and does good actions has acquired has acquired a multiplied reward. His wealth draws him closer to 
Allah by him spending it in Allah’s way, and his children also are a means for raising his rank, by their prayers for him. 
So those believers who do good deeds - for them is a multiple reward for the good they did and they will be in the higher 
ranks of Paradise, safe from whatever they fear; punishment, death and ending of joy. 

(J§j5 And the disbelievers who make it their utmost effort to turn people away from our verses and strive hard to achieve 
these goals of theirs are losers in this world and will be punished in the Hereafter. 

O Messenger, say: “My Lord expands provision for whom He wants from His creation and makes it tight for whom 
He wants. And whatever you spend in Allah’s way, Allah will replace it for you in this world by giving you what is better 
than it and by giving you great reward in the Hereafter. And Allah is the best of providers, so whoever seeks provision 
should resort to Him”. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The leaders disassociating themselves from the followers and the followers from the leaders will not excuse either of 
them from their responsibility. 

2. Affluence distances from complying with the truth and submitting to it. 

3. A believer is benefited through his wealth and children whilst a disbeliever is not benefited through them. 

4. Spending in the path of Allah leads to recompensing wealth in this world and good reward in the Hereafter. 


(j£) ji4> cJt 

3 ^=^ Jp I 

J-^5 0^*0^ I 

















t VT [g fcrr 

\y ^^\S[ <^J±*>\ ^ 

^^4-^ A^ .j-AAo 

M£^sjffi0ZJ- 
o\ a^A^ iAA^ oA^J?^A^^ 

<^ii*-o VAixij\ ^ ^5 j ^ 

Sb\^shp$i^j $&&y £ 

J\i3 l_ 9mZ i^'^'J^U^'s^ 
ol^a^ 

^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^A 

>x^=sj (^j^-^uj ^ [\S^jJ ^IA^C^A^jAA 

o' gOg~?>>>i—=? .h o' '•^-43®'* 

.-t" »" H%5 -:-Ci-l <x- i! > ic 

ji^OjAiuoj'AP(5 Jo C$J, jk=^^,ZA lS*ol ^5: 

k&JfA i>4^ ilrtjSl^ U 

(^y^i^'jlS^Xcj^ju (Jj 5ljs(^ feLS^iX 


^ * 
*; 


{g} O Messenger, remember the day Allah will 
gather them all, then Allah will say to the angels, to 
scold the idolaters and rebuke them: “Are these the 
ones who used to worship you in the worldly life 
besides Allah?” 

@> The angels will say: “You are pure and exalt¬ 
ed. You are our guardian, not them, so there is no 
friendship between us and them, but rather these 
idolaters used to worship the satans. They used to 
appear to them as angels, so they would worship 
them besides Allah, most of them were believers 
in them”. 

@ On the day of gathering and reckoning, the wor¬ 
shipped will not be able to benefit those who wor¬ 
shipped them besides Allah in the world nor will 
they be able to harm them. And I will say to those 
who wronged themselves through disbelief and 
sins: “Taste the punishment of the fire which you 
used to deny in the world”. 

@ And when you read to these denying idolaters 
our clear verses revealed to our Messenger and in 
which there is no uncertainty they say: ““This is a 
mere human being who has brought this message 
to divert us away from the path of our forefathers”. 
And they said: “The Qur’an is nothing but a fabri¬ 
cated lie against Allah”. And those who disbelieved 
in Allah said regarding the Qur’an when it came to 
them from Allah: “This is nothing but clear magic 
to separate between husband and wife, and son and 
father”. 

@ And I have not give them books which they are 
reading, which may be a reason for them to pass 
judgement on the Qur’an being a lie which Mu¬ 
hammad fabricated, nor did I send towards them, before sending you O Messenger, a messenger who would warn them 
of Allah’s punishment. 

@) And the previous nations such as Aad, Thamud and the people of Lot denied. And the idolaters from your people have 
not reached even a tenth of the strength, might and numbers the previous nations reached. Every one of them denied their 
Messenger, so the wealth, strength and numbers they were given did not benefit, and so My punishment befell them. So 
see the outcome of My reproachment and that of My punishment. 

{§p Say - O Messenger, to these idolaters: “I only direct you to and advise you of one characteristic, which is that you 
stand free from desires, for Allah’s sake, in twos and individually, then think about the life of your companion and what 
you know of his intelligence, truthfulness and trustworthiness”, so that it becomes clear to you that he (peace be upon 
him) is not insane. He is not but a warner to you before a severe punishment, if you do not repent to Allah from associ¬ 
ating partners with Him. 

@) O Messenger! Say to these idolaters who reject: “Whatever reward or payment I ask you for the guidance and good 
I have brought you, then it is - assuming it exists - for you. My reward is only with Allah alone, and He is Witness to 
everything. He witnesses that I have conveyed to you, and witnesses your actions and will then give you their full re¬ 
ward”. 

After He stated the proof against the people of falsehood and idolatry, He stated that this is His practice, and so He said: 
@ O Messenger, say: “My Lord will empower the truth over falsehood, thus invalidating it, and He is Knower of the 
Ghaib. Nothing in the heavens or the earth is hidden from Him, and the actions of His servants are not hidden from Him”. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The angels will disassociate themselves on the day of judgment from the claim of some of the idolaters that they used 
to worship them. 2. The satans deceived the idolaters when they would claim to them that they are angels and so the idol¬ 
aters would worship them. 3. Blind following of forefathers diverts from guidance. 4. Detaching oneself from desires 
and thinking objectively is a means of reaching the correct conclusion and right mindset. 5. A caller towards Allah does 
not await reward from any person, but rather he only expects it from the Lord of people. 






















til*£?■ J® 
j (41 lS^jJL- 3 CUt-CJ^l (1)L? i3^ A> 4p4“">i4 L»jl® 

o ^ ^ 

^ ^ 9 l5_^( ^) <-+>;_}> L_ 1 

j? ^ ^ ° ^ ^ ^ 

Cy^^Jjy>^===ys>J0 J S-J0.0&2 
(j yU ; |>^JJ ^\—Sr 9 (^ -V~-jO 0^4 (^5i_^xil\j 

0 ‘pri/ 2 4^ 41^^>4^144 s tS" j 


@ O Messenger! Say to these idolaters who reject: 

“The truth which is Islam has come, and falsehood 
which has no effect or supremacy has gone, and it 
will not return to its dominance”. (j>S) O Messenger! 

Say to these idolaters who reject: “If I go astray 
from the truth in what I convey to you, the harm 
of my misguidance is confined to me. None of it 
will affect you. And if I am guided to Him, it is 
due to what my Lord reveals to me. He is Hearing 
of the sayings of His servants and Near, it not be¬ 
ing difficult for Him to hear what I say”. @ And if 
you were to see, O Messenger, when these deniers 
will be terrified when they see the punishment on 
the day of judgment. So there will be no place for 
them to run to from it, nor any refuge for them to re¬ 
sort to, and they will be seized from a nearby place 
which is easy to reach from the very beginning. If 
you were to see that, you would see a strange mat¬ 
ter. d|p And they will say when they see their fate: 

“We have brought faith in the day of judgment”, 
but how will they pursue and acquire faith when the 
place for accepting faith has gone far from them, by 
their leaving the worldly abode, the abode of ac¬ 
tion and no reward, to the abode of the Hereafter, 
the abode of reward and no action? And how 
will faith be attained for them and accepted from 
them, when they had disbelieved in it in the worldly 
life and would suspiciously accuse from a direction 
far from the truth, thus saying about the Messen¬ 
ger (peace be upon him): magician, soothsayer and 
poet? |§p And these deniers were prevented from 
that which they desire, from the pleasure of this 
life, as well as repentance from disbelief, salvation 
from the fire and returning to the worldly life, just as was done with their likes from the nations before them who denied. 
They were in doubt about what the messengers brought, i.e., believing the Oneness of Allah and faith in the resurrection. 


JqJrJ j^L)J 




Saba’ 


434 


Part 22 


Surah Fatir (The Originator) 

® Topic of the Surah: 

It focuses on presenting the manifestations of Allah’s power and perfection in the creation, and the incentives to glorify 
Him, fear Him, bring faith in Him and remember His favours. 

® Explanation: 

{Jj All praise is for Allah, Creator of the heavens and the earth without a precedent, and who made from the angels mes¬ 
sengers who execute His regulatory commands. Some of them convey the revelation to the Prophets and strengthen them 
to perform what they were entrusted with. Some of them have two, three or four wings through which they fly to carry out 
what they have been ordered. Allah increases His creation in what He wishes of limbs, beauty or voice. Allah is Powerful 

over everything. Nothing is outside His ability. (JfJ) The keys to everything are in Allah’s hands. So whatever provision, 
guidance or good fortune He opens up for people, nobody has the ability to stop it. And whatever He stops of this, there 
is nobody who is able to send it after He has stopped it. And He is the Mighty whom nobody can overpower, Wise in His 

creating, decreeing and planning. @ O people, remember Allah’s favour on you through your hearts and tongues, and 
through your limbs by action. Do you have any creator besides Allah who provides you from the sky with the water He 
sends to you and who provides you from the earth with the fruits and crops He grows? There is no true Allah besides Him. 
So how after this do you turn away from this truth and fabricate lies against Allah, and claim that Allah has partners when 
He is the one who created all of you and provides for all of you? 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The scene of the terror of the disbelievers on the day of judgment will be a great scene. 2. The place where faith will 
benefit is this world, because it is the abode of action. 3. The greatness of the creation of the angels shows the greatness 
of their Creator. 























tr o 




c£ j4j 2^ J^4 0^9 

Zjj3$& > j> jSj>5 ^ oi0-i^ ^ 4^ 



J-$ l£ ji\ <ji)j(£) ^ oisrdy-^’ 

4j^ 3^ ^ 



(J) And if your people deny you, O Messenger, be 
patient, because you are not the first Messenger 
whose people denied him, as nations before you 
had denied their prophets, such as Aad, Thamud 
and the people of Lot. And to Allah alone all mat¬ 
ters are returned, so He will destroy the deniers and 
help His messengers and the believers. 

(jj) O people, the resurrection and recompense on 
the day of judgment which Allah has promised you 
are true without a doubt, so the pleasures of the 
worldly life and its desires should not deceive you 
from preparing for this day through good actions, 
nor should the Satan deceive you by his adornment 
of falsehood and by inciting you to incline towards 
the worldly life. 

© O people, the satan is for you an enemy whose 
enmity is everlasting, so take him as an enemy by 
committing to fighting him. The satan only calls his 
followers towards disbelief in Allah so that their 
outcome is to enter the burning fire on the day of 
judgment. 

(Sj) Those who disbelieved in Allah by following 
the satan will have a severe punishment. And those 
who believe in Allah and do good actions will have 
forgiveness from Allah for their sins and will have a 
great reward from Him which is Paradise. 

© The one for whom the satan has beautified his 
bad actions and so he thinks them to be good is not 
like the one for whom Allah has beautified the truth 
and so he believes it to be the truth, because Allah 
leads astray whom He wants and guides whom He 
wants, without anyone to compel Him. So do not 
destroy yourself, O Messenger, out of grief over the 
misguidance of the misguided. Allah is Knowing of what they do. Nothing of their actions is hidden from Him. 

@ Allah is the one who sent the winds, then these winds move clouds, then I lead these clouds to a land in which there 
are no plants, then I give life through its water, causing plants to grow, after being dead and dry. So just as I gave life to 
this land after its death, through the plants I placed in it, the resurrection of the dead will happen on the day of judgment, 
(jp Whoever wants honour in this world or in the Hereafter should only seek it from Allah, because for Allah alone is 
honour in both of them. His pleasant rememberance is elevated to Him, and the good deeds of His servants are raised to 
Him. And those who make evil schemes, such as trying to kill the Messenger (peace be upon him), will have a severe 
punishment. And the scheming of these disbelievers will perish and no objective of theirs will be realised. 

@ Allah is the one who created your father Adam from soil, then He created you from a sperm-drop, then He made 
you men and women who marry one another. And no female conceives a foetus nor does she give birth except with His 
knowledge. Nothing of that is hidden from Him. And the lifespan of any of His creation is not increased nor is it de¬ 
creased except that it is written in the Preserved Tablet. That which has been mentioned, namely creating you from soil, 
creating you in stages and writing your lifespans in the Preserved Tablet, is easy for Allah. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The Messenger (peace be upon him) has been consoled by mentioning the conditions of the messengers with their 
people. 

2. Being deceived by the world is a means of turning away from the truth. 

3. Taking the satan as an enemy is by adopting the means which help protect against Him, such as the remembrance of 
Allah, recitation of the Qur’an, acts of obedience and leaving sins. 

4. Allah is the Exalted. 




Fatir 


435 


Part 22 


















l£/-^ 


-^j 


iJ^( ^ ) r\ <v lg3f y^. L^ 4 ^====lL^ 

'I li \ jj J^lC' 5 \^CLZ^j^J^J3 



@ And the two seas are not alike: One of them is 
extremely sweet and easy to drink due to its sweet¬ 
ness, and the other is salty and bitter which is not 
drinkable due to its extreme saltiness. And from 
each of the abovementioned seas you eat fresh 
meat, which is fish, and you extract from them ru¬ 
bies and coral which you wear as adornment. And 
you see the ships, O onlooker, splitting the sea with 
its sailing, coming and going, so you can seek the 
grace of Allah through trade, and so that you thank 
Allah for His many favours He has done for you. 

@ Allah enters the night into the day so it be¬ 
comes longer and He enters the day into night so 
it becomes longer. And He made the sun and the 
moon subservient, each one of them travels in its 
appointed orbit until a fixed time which only Allah 
knows, which is the day of judgment. He who fixes 
all of that and carries it out is Allah your Lord. To 
Him alone belongs the kingdom. And the idols you 
worship besides Him do not even possess the thin 
membrane over the datestone, so how do you wor¬ 
ship them besides Me? 

(jp If you call your Allahs, they cannot hear your 
call, because they are inanimate objects which have 
no life in them nor can they hear. And if they could 
hear your calling them, for argument’s sake, they 
could not respond to you. And on the day of judg¬ 
ment they will disassociate themselves from your 
idolatry and your worshipping them, so there is 
nobody who can inform you, O Messenger, more 
truthfully than Allah. 

(§)) O people, you are the ones in need of Allah in all 
your affairs and in all your conditions. And Allah 
is the Self-sufficient who does not need you for anything, the Praiseworthy in this world and the Hereafter for what He 
decrees for His servants. 

(SjP If He wants to remove you by destroying you, He can remove you and bring a new creation in your place who will 
worship Him and not associate any partner with Him. 

@) And removing you by destroying you and bringing a new creation in your place is not impossible for Allah. 

@ And no soul will carry the sin of another, but rather every sinning soul will carry its own sin. And if a soul who has 
been burdened with carrying its sin, calls someone to carry some of its sins, nothing of its sins will be carried, even if 
the one who is being asked is a close relative. O Messenger, you can only warn of Allah’s punishment those who fear 
their Lord in private and complete the prayer in the most perfect way, for they are the ones who will take heed from your 
warning, whoever is purified from his sins, the greatest of them being polythiesm, then his purification will only benefit 
himself when he returns to his Lord, And Allah is not in any need for His slaves obedience. To Allah is the return on the 
day of judgment for the reckoning and recompense. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The subjugation of the sea, the alteration of the night and day and the subjugation of the sun and moon are all amongst 
Allah’s favours to the people, but the people are used to these favours and thus absentminded of them. 

2. The minds of the idolaters are foolish as they call upon idols which cannot hear or understand. 

3. Being needy towards Allah is a quality which is inseparable from humans and independence is a quality of perfection 
for Allah. 

4. Purification of the soul is dependent on the servant himself, for it is up to him to either protect it or ruin it. 


k=cjb IjLS 
olj 






Fatir 


436 


Part 22 




















| | 





j JptSlj ciUliaJ \ Sij ^iSy-^Xt 
T, ^ _i/^4 JjJii \ ^jQ 

M 



a ^/i 



\jj^> fj^\^d^L^jj\ ^>103^^ ici 

tj) 3 (Q”r;^ VkS\ Crio'S 1 &&J 

£ . 9 







^LlS>ci^1*6^1 )j C^\j-a1)j \ 0<S 


O 


(jp The disbeliever and believer are not the same in 
status, just as the blind and seeing are not the same. 
|jp And disbelief and faith are not the same, just as 
darkness and light are not the same. 

(jp And Paradise and the fire of hell are not the 
same in their effects, just as shade and hot winds 
are not the same. 

@ And the believers and disbelievers are not the 
same, just as the living and the dead are not the 
same. Allah makes those whom He wants to guide 
hear. And you, O Messenger, cannot make the dis¬ 
believers who are like the dead in the graves hear, 
(jp You are not except a warner to them of Allah’s 
punishment. 

@ O Messenger, I have sent you with the truth in 
which there is no doubt, to give good news to the 
believers of the generous reward He has prepared 
for them and to warn the disbelievers of the painful 
^ punishment He has prepared for them. And there 
® is no nation from the previous nations except that 
there passed in them a messenger from Allah to 
warn them of His punishment. 

(jP And if your people deny you, O Messenger, 
be patient, because you are not the first Messen¬ 
ger whose people denied him, as the nations before 
them denied their messengers, such as Aad, Tha- 
mud and the people of Lot. Their messengers came 
to them with clear evidences and overwhelming 
miracles which prove their truthfulness, and their 
messengers came to them with scrolls and with the 
Scripture which is enlightening for one who pon¬ 
ders over it and contemplates it. 

(jP But despite that, they disbelieved in Allah and 
His messengers and they did not accept what they brought from Him, so I destroyed those who disbelieved. So think, O 
Messenger, how terrible my punishment was when I destroyed them. 

(jp O Messenger, have you not seen that I sent rainwater from the sky, then I extracted fruits of different colours from that 
water, amongst them red, green, yellow and others, after I had watered their trees from it? And from the mountains are 
white tracts, red tracts and extremely black tracts. 

(jp And amongst men, animals and cattle (camels, cows and sheep) are different colours like that which was mentioned. 
Only those who exalt Allah and have true fear of Him, are the knowledgable ones, because they recognise His attributes. 
His sacred law and the proof of His power. Allah is Mighty, no one can overpower Him. He forgives of the sins of His 
servants who repent. 

@ Those who read the Book of Allah which I revealed to My Messenger and practice what it contains, and complete 
the prayer in the best way, and who spend from what I have provided them, through Zakat and other ways, secretly and 
openly, seek through those actions a trade with Allah which is never profitless. 

(jp So that Allah can give them the full reward of their actions and increase them from His grace, as this is His domain. 
He is Forgiving of the sins of those who are described with these qualities and Appreciating of their good actions. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The vast difference between the people of truth and people of falsehood. 

2. The sending of a great number of messengers before the advent of Muhammad (peace be upon him) shows the great¬ 
ness of Allah’s mercy, and the ungrateful nature of many people. 

3. The eventual destruction of disbelievers is a divine custom. 

4. Faith and its characteristics lead to all types of benefits and success, whilst the qualities of disbelief are a losing trade! 


>4-r^5 

O v K< » £ . *< -» ~^ 

124^23 (J*.J* 

patir 437 


Part 22 





















\ (j*,<S^\j 

^ I25j5^ O^^oJo 

tltt'i 4J^ O U [y\-^ J^r^J 

■^U^Qj\Mj 310*5 ^ &&* I 




3^3^5-45 ($) 3 s - 


(^j^-ili£S" v^) jS 


@ The scripture I have revealed to you, O Mes¬ 
senger, is the truth in which there is not doubt, it 
has been revealed by Allah affirming the precious 
scriptures. Allah is well informed 
about His servants and He sees everything. He 
therefore reveals to the Messenger of every nation 
what they need in their time. 

(S|p Then I gave the Qur’an to the nation of Mu¬ 
hammad peace be with him whom I had chosen 
over other communities. Some of them wronged 
their own souls by doing prohibited acts and leav¬ 
ing out their obligations. Some were moderate by 
doing their obligations and leaving out prohibited 
acts, together with leaving out some recommended 
acts and doing some disliked acts. Some, by Allah’s 
leave, were foremost in good deeds, by doing their 
obligations and recommended acts and leaving out 
prohibited and disliked acts. The abovementioned 
- selection of this nation and its being given the 
Qur’an - is the greatest favour to which no favour 
can come close. 

(jp Gardens of residence, which will be entered by 
these chosen ones. In it they will wear bracelets of 
gold and pearls and their garments therein will be 
silk. 

They will say after they enter Paradise: Praise 
be to Allah, Who has removed from us all grief on 
account of the fear that we had of entering the fire. 

Our Lord is truly forgiving of the sins of those serv¬ 
ants of His who repent, and He is appreciative for 
their following Him. 

The One who has settled us in the Everlasting 
Home - out of His bounty, not by our might or 
strength, where no toil or fatigue will touch us. 

After Allah mentioned the recompense of those of His servants who were chosen, He mentioned the recompense of the 
dejected ones from amongst them, who are the disbelievers, in the following verse: 

(jP For those who deny Allah will be the fire of Hell, in which they will remain forever. Neither will the decision of death 
be passed for them, so they can die and be relieved from the punishment, nor will the punishment of Hell be alleviated 
for them in any way. Similar to this recompense, I will reward every person who denies the favours of His Lord on the 
Day of Judgement. 

(jp They will cry out therein as loud as they can, seeking help by saying: Our Lord! Let us out from the fire, and we will 
do righteous deeds, different to what we did before so that we can attain Your pleasure and be saved from Your punish¬ 
ment. Allah will respond to them thus: Did I not let you live a life long enough so that anyone who wanted to take heed 
could do so and do righteous deeds; and the Messenger came to you to warn you of Allah’s punishment? Thus you have 
no argument nor any excuse after all of this, so taste the punishment of the fire. Those who wrong themselves by disbelief 
and sins will have no helper to rescue them from Allah’s punishment or lighten it for them. 

(jp Allah knows all that is hidden in the heavens and earth. Nothing of that misses Him. He knows whatever His servants 
conceal in their chests, whether good or bad. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The virtue of the nation of Muhammad (peace be upon him) over all other nation. 

2. The difference in the faith of the believers implies a difference in their rank in the world and the Hereafter. 

3. Paradise is a place of comfort and happiness, while the fire is a place of fatigue and misery. 

4. Time is a trust that must be guarded. Whoever wastes it will regret when regret will be of no use. 

5. Allah’s knowledge encompasses everything. 


A3 
** ^ 

j QjjlAi dffij 



Fatir 


438 


Part 22 



















Isrv 

safest, ^ 





& Js ^\JCj>^ \y*y& 

cL^4i\ C)j3 

-^ioi(3^ ^ 

1^$^ > 4^ ^ 



& <rr 

2dJoO/VA^-' 

i r ' 


3 ^\^xS\ 5)^13 cj^S^-X? Jetf^j 
k{\^^w^\jjtx^\ U>£&$ 
S^ju^ )_ 1 ^-^3 v^=^i \ Jyy^Sij 


# S i . ^ " , 


hs.^ 


j| It is He who made some of you, O people, suc¬ 
ceed others on earth. Those who deny Allah and 
what the messengers brought, then the sin and ret- 
& ribution of their disbelief will be borne by them. 
** Their disbelief does not harm their Lord. The dis¬ 
belief of the disbelievers adds only to their Lord’s 
displeasure and hatred for them. The disbelief of 
the disbelievers adds only to their loss, as they will 
lose what Allah would have prepared for them in 
Paradise had they believed. 

(SjJ) Say - O Messenger, to these idolaters: Tell me 
about those partners of yours that you worship in¬ 
stead of Allah, what have they created on earth. Did 
they create its mountains? Did they create its riv¬ 
ers? Did they create its animals? Or do they have 
any share with Allah in the creation of the heav¬ 
ens? Or have I given them a book in which there 
is proof of the validity of their worshipping their 
idols? Nothing of that is true. In fact, those who 
wrong themselves by disbelief and sins promise 
one another 
nothing but delusion. 

{Jj Allah, (may He be glorified), holds the heavens 
and the earth preventing them from vanishing and 
were they to vanish, hypothetically, there is none to 
hold them back from vanishing after Him, (may He 
be glorified). He is Forbearing, and does not rush to 
punish, Forgiving of the sins of those of His serv¬ 
ants who repent. 

@ These denying disbelievers swore a solemn 
and affirmed oath that if a messenger from Allah 
came to them to warn them of His punishment, they 
would be more guided and follow the truth more 
than the Jews, Christians and others. Yet when Muhammad (peace be upon him) came to them after being sent by His 
Lord, and he warned them of Allah’s punishment, his coming only increased them in aversion to the truth and adherence 
to falsehood. They did not fulfil the solemn oaths that they took that they will be more guided than those who preceded 
them. 

@ The oaths that they took in Allah’s name was not done in good faith and with a sound objective. It was only to be 
arrogant on earth and to deceive people. An evil plot only rebounds on those who plotted it. So are these arrogant plotters 
waiting for anything but Allah’s established practice, which is their destruction as He had destroyed those predecessors 
of theirs who were similar to them. You will not find any change to Allah’s practice in destroying those who are arrogant, 
such that the destruction does not come on them, nor any diversion such that it falls on others besides them, because it is 
an established divine practice. 

{j|) Have these deniers not travelled on earth and reflected over how those nations before them who had denied met their 
end? Was their end not an evil one as Allah destroyed them, although they were superior to these people in strength? Allah 
is not to be outdone by anything 

in the heavens or on earth. He is the One who knows about the actions of these deniers - nothing of their actions is hidden 
from nor escapes Him. He has power to destroy them whenever He wills. 

Beneficial Points: 

1. Disbelief is a cause of Allah’s displeasure and a path to loss and wretchedness. 

2. The idolaters do not have any evidence for their idolatry, neither rational or textual. 

3. The wrongdoer’s plotting will only came back to destroy him sooner or later. 


J 0 ^== X ais j 

439 


Fatir 


Part 22 























© If Allah were to rush to punish people for the 
wrong they have done and the sins they perpetrated, 
He would have destroyed all the people on earth 
at once, together with the animals and wealth they 
own. But, He, (may He be glorified), gives them 
respite until a fixed time, which is the day of resur¬ 
rection. When the day of resurrection comes, Allah 
is fully aware of what His servants used to do, and 
nothing remains hidden from Him. He will then 
recompense them for their actions, whether good 
or bad. 

Ya Sin (Surah Ya Sin) 

® Themes of the Surah: 

It focuses on the establishment of and the evidence 
for messengership and resurrection. 

® Explanation: 

© Ya Sin. The discussion on similar letters has al¬ 
ready passed at the beginning of Surah Al-Baqarah. 
© Allah takes an oath by the Qur’an, whose verses 
have been perfectly constructed, and to which no 
falsehood comes neither from in front of nor be¬ 
hind it. 

© You, O Messenger, are on the messengers whom 
Allah sent to His servants, to instruct them to de¬ 
clare His Oneness and to worship Him alone. 
0Ona straight approach and upright law. 

© This straight approach and upright law is re¬ 
vealed from your Lord, the Mighty, whom no one 
can challenge, and the Merciful to His servants who 
have faith. 

© I revealed it to you to warn and exhort a nation, 4 




ti * 




3 




ASS> 


15 I 


Ya Sin 


440 

tlgcmaS 

result they are heedless of faith and monotheism. Likewise is the case of every nation which has been away from the 
exhortation, they need messengers, scholars and preachers to remind them. 

© The punishment from Allah has become binding on most of these people, after the truth from Allah on the tongue of 
His Messenger reached them but they did not believe in it and remained on their disbelief. They do not have faith in Allah 
and nor His Messenger and they do not act on the truth that came to them. 

© These people do not have faith nor are they guided. Their example in this is like those in whose necks iron collars that 
extend all the way up and whose hands are tied to their necks under their chins. As a result, they are forced to lift their 
heads to the sky and they are unable to lower them. These people are shackled from having faith in Allah and therefore 
they do not submit to it and they do not lower their heads on account of it. 

© I placed before them a barrier to the truth and behind them another barrier. I covered their eyes from the truth so 
they cannot see in a manner that is of benefit to them. This happened to them after their stubborness and persistence in 
disbelief became apparent. 

© It is all the same to these disbelievers who oppose the truth, whether you, O Muhammad, warn them or you do not 
warn them. They will not accept what you have brought from Allah. 

© The person who really benefits from your warning is the one who accepts this Qur’an and follows what is contained 
in it, and who fears His Lord in solitude where nobody else sees him. So tell those who have these attributes the pleasing 
news of Allah’s wiping out their sins and HForgiving them and of a great reward awaiting them in the Hereafter, which is 
entry into Paradise. © I shall bring the dead back to life by resurrecting them to give account on the day of resurrection, 
we record the good and the bad deeds that they send forth in this life to be rewarded for in the next, and we also record the 
good and bad aftereffects from their actions, such as the good that comes out of charity after they pass away and the evils 
that result of their misdeeds. We have counted everything, and recorded it in a clear book, which is the preserved tablet. 
® Beneficial Points: 1. Obstinacy is a barrier from guidance to the truth. 2. Acting on the Qur’an and the fear of Allah 
are means to enter Paradise. 3. The virtue of a righteous child, continually benefitting charity, and similar deeds where 
the good remains long after the believing servant has passed away. 




























' I 




\ j >! iS >i3 ll4>?*^^ ^10 

ii($)5 <fes^i=4pi 

\.oi ^(3^ 020-0^ dp^Uj 
£A] \y**doj3 \jUj5 


4^Jc^ Lv^^/y^g-W 9( ^ )0 9^^/a^ajft jiSu\ p*3^===aj 




_ 



@ Give, 0 Messenger, these stubborn deniers an 
example that will be a lesson for them, which is the 
story of the people of the town when their messen¬ 
gers came to them. 

(jJS) When I sent to them at first two messengers to 
call them to Allah’s Oneness and His worship. But 
they rejected these two messengers. Then we sent 
as reinforcement for these two a third Messenger 
with them. The three messengers said to the people 
of the town: We - all three of us - have been sent to 
you, to call you to Allah’s Oneness and to follow 
His law. 

(j| The people of the town said to those who were 
sent: You are only men like us. You do not have 
any special status over us. The Merciful has not 
sent down any revelation to you. You are only lying 
about Allah in this claim of yours. 

@ The three messengers said in response to the de¬ 
nial by the people of the town: Our Lord knows that 
we have been sent by Him to you, O people of the 
town! That is enough evidence for us. 

@ Our duty is only to clearly convey what we have 
been instructed to convey to you. We have no con¬ 
trol over your guidance. 

The people of the town said to the messengers: 
We see an evil omen in you. If you do not stop 
calling us to monotheism, we will punish you by 
stoning to death and you will receive a painful pun¬ 
ishment from us. 

The messengers said in response to them: Your 
evil omen is within yourselves on account of your 
denial of Allah and your leaving out following His 
messengers. Do you see an evil omen if we remind¬ 
ed you of Allah! In fact, you are a people who have gone too far in the perpetration of disbelief and sins. 

(Sj) From a far part of the town a man came running fearing his people’s denial of the messengers and their threatening to 
kill or harm them. He said: O my people! Follow what these messengers have brought. 

@ O people! Follow those who do not ask you for any reward for conveying what they brought and they are rightly 
guided in the revelation of Allah that they convey to you. A person like this deserves to be followed. 

@ This well-wishing man said: What prevents me from worshipping Allah Who created me? What prevents you from 
worshipping your Lord Who created you, and to Him alone you will return when you are resurrected for the recompense? 
@ Shall I take other deities to be wrongly worshipped instead of Allah Who created me? If the Merciful intends harm for 
me, the intercession of these other deities will not avail me at all, nor 

will they be able to save me from the harm that Allah intended for me if I die as a disbeliever. 

(jp If I have to take them as deities besides Allah I would be in clear error as I would have worshipped a being that is not 
deserving of worship and I would have omitted worshipping the Being Who is deserving thereof. 

{§§) O my people, I have accepted both my and your Lord, so listen to me. I do not care about the threats of murder that 
you make. But his people insisted on killing him and Allah entered him into Paradise. 

((j) It was said in honour of this man after his people killed him: Enter Paradise after you are killed as a martyr. When 
he entered it and saw the delight therein, he said longingly: If only my people who denied and killed me knew about the 
forgiveness of sins that I obtained and what my Lord has honoured me with, they would have believed like how I believed 
and they would have attained a reward similar to mine. 

It was said in honour of this man after his people killed him: Enter Paradise after you are killed as a martyr. When 
he entered it and saw the delight therein, he said longingly: If only my people who denied and killed me knew about the 
forgiveness of sins that I obtained and what my Lord has honoured me with, they would have believed like how I believed 
and they would have attained a reward similar to mine. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The importance of stories in calling towards Allah. 2. Taking an evil omen is an act of disbelief. 3. It is obligatory to 
wish well for the people of truth. 4. To love good and wellbeing for people is an attribute of the people of faith. 


^ ^ ^ ^ ^ 2 ^ ^ _ _ 

Jo-31 


















1 i Y 




6ol($lc#iGf| 

^A) ^ lyS) \ jl 3^V ^P^rw>cj( ^ ) 

o^>4^£ 

^it- 1^3 





I 

v^y^====lj aL*3 


--Lr^ 6 ^ 4 ^ 


31 


(jp In order to destroy his people who had denied 
and killed him, I did not need an army of angels to 
be sent down from the sky. Their matter was much 
easier than that for Me. I had decreed that their de¬ 
struction will be by a blast from the sky and not by 
sending down the angels of punishment. 

@ Thus the incident of the destruction of his peo¬ 
ple was simply one blast which we sent upon them 
and they fell down with nothing remaining. Their 
example is like that of a fire that was burning and 
then was extinguished, leaving behind no trace. 

@> Alas for those servants who denied, and how 
regretful will their situation be on the day of res¬ 
urrection when they will see the punishment. That 
is because in the world, whenever any Messenger 
from Allah came to them, they used to mock at and 
ridicule him. Their outcome will therefore be regret 
on the day of resurrection for the neglect of their 
duty to Allah. 

@ Did these people who deny and ridicule the 
messengers not see a lesson in those nations who 
preceded them? They passed away and did not re¬ 
turn to the world a second time. Rather they met the 
actions they had sent ahead and Allah will recom¬ 
pense them for that. 

(jp All nations, without exception, will be brought 
before Me on the Day of Resurrection after they are 
resurrected for Me to give them the recompense for 
their actions. 

(S|p A sign for those who deny the resurrection that 
the resurrection is true is this dry and barren land, 
on which I sent down rain from the sky and I grew 
therein various types of plants and produced vari¬ 
ous kinds of grains for people to eat. The One Who gave life to this earth by sending down the rain and bringing out the 
plants, is able to give life to and resurrect the dead. 

(jp We have placed in this earth, on which I sent down rain, gardens of date palms and grapes; and I caused springs of 
water to gush forth to irrigate them. 

(jp So that people can eat of the fruits of those gardens that Allah has blessed them with and for which they did not make 
any effort. Do they not thank Allah, Who gave them all of that out of His bounty and mercy for them, by worshipping 
Him alone and having faith in His messengers?! 

(S|§) Glory be to Allah Who created the various types of plants and trees, and of the souls of people, as He created males 
and females, and other creations of Allah that people do not know of on land, sea and other places. 

(jp An indication for people of Allah’s Oneness is that I take away the daylight as the day draws to an end, bringing the 
night, as the day withdraws from it, until the people are in complete darkness. 

(jp A sign for them of Allah’s Oneness is this sun that runs to a point that Allah knows and does not go beyond that. That 
determination is the determination of the Mighty, who is not challenged by anyone, the Knower from Whom nothing of 
His creation is hidden. 

(S§P A sign for them indicating His Oneness, (may He be glorified), is this moon for which I have determined phases each 
night. It begins small then becomes big and then small again until it becomes similar to a twisted, old date stalk, in it 
appearing as thin, curved, yellow and old. 

@) These signs; the sun moon, night and day, each are predetermined by Allah’s divine arrangement/determination and do 
not surpass what has been determined for them. The sun cannot catch up with the moon to change its course or take away 
its light, and nor can the night outpace the day and enter upon it before its time ends. All these creations, subservient or 
not, such as stars and galaxies, have their own courses as per Allah’s determination and protection. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. No one will return to the world after death. 

2. One of the evidence of resurrection is the revival of the lifeless earth with green plants and the production of grain 
from it. 


ibis W ($) 


YaSTn 


Part 23 


















2 ***& j 9 -^jt. *t 

Aj^£-J 

pi 9 ( ^ ) O^SS.^^lL>5 
tasJ 0 ^iJ^: 10 5 j 

5_^0j^=tij>] ^JjL>-Uj^Cj ji\ &(>[ a \ j £ 5 [ j43 J_S 

6\?Lud5 i^T £&J ^(4^ r£to uMj^ 1 
^ L^ : '^ p 


@) Another sign for them of Allah’s Oneness and 
of His favour to His servants is that I carried those 
who were saved from the flood from the progeny of 
Adam in the time of Noah in the ship that was filled 
with Allah’s creations. Allah carried therein a pair 
of every species. 

||p A sign for them of Allah’s Oneness and His fa¬ 
vour to His servants is that I created for them, like 
the ship of Noah, conveyances and some types of 
animals on which they can travel long distances. 
(S§§) If I wished to drown them I would have done 
so. There would be no one to help them if I wished 
to drown them and there would be no one to rescue 
them if they drowned by My command and decree. 
@ Except if I have mercy on them by rescuing 
them from drowning and restoring them to enjoy 
until a specified time that they will not go beyond, 
so that they take a lesson and have faith. 

@ When these idolaters who turn away from faith 
are told: Beware of what you are going towards in 
pj*' the Hereafter and its difficulties, and beware of the 
world behind you, in the hope that Allah will favour 
you with His mercy, they do not comply with that 
but they turn away from it without any care. 

Whenever Allah’s signs indicating to His One¬ 
ness and His being deserving of being worshipped 
alone came to these idolaters, they used to turn 
away from it without taking heed. 

@ When these stubborn ones are told: Assist the 
poor and the needy with the wealth that Allah has 
provided you with, they disapprovingly reply say¬ 
ing to those who have faith: Shall we feed those 
Part 23 whom Allah could feed if He wanted to?! So we do 

not go against His will. You, O believers, are simply in clearly error and far off from the truth. 

{jp The disbelievers who deny the resurrection say in denial of it and regarding it as far-fetched: When is this resurrection 
if you, O believers, are true in your claim that it is to occur? 

{jp But all these deniers of resurrection who regard it as far-fetched are waiting for is the first blast when it is blown into 
the trumpet, which will 

suddenly overtake them while they are in their worldly concerns of buying, selling, irrigating and herding and other 
worldly concerns. 

(jp When this blast surprises them they will not be able to make a bequest for one another, and they will not be able to 
return to their homes and families. Instead, they will die whilst they are in these worldly concerns of theirs, 
jp The trumpet will be blown a second time for the resurrection, and suddenly they will all come out of their graves 
rushing towards their Lord for the reckoning and recompense. 

jp These disbelievers who deny the resurrection will say in regret: What loss is ours! Who is it that has raised us from 
our grave? They will be given a response to their question: This is what Allah promised and will definitely occur. The 
messengers spoke the truth in the message of their Lord that they conveyed in this regard. 

jp The matter of resurrection from the graves will only be an effect of a second blowing of the trumpet and all created 
things will be presented before us on the Day of Resurrection to give account. 

(jp Judgement will be passed with fairness on that day and you, O servants, will not be wronged in the least by an increase 
of your bad deeds or a reduction in your good deeds. You will simply be given the full recompense for what you used to 
do in the worldly life. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. One of the techniques of Allah’s educating His servants is that He placed before them signs, which they can use to 
deduce what will be of benefit to them in their religious and worldly affairs. 2. Allah empowered His servant and gave 
them the ability to fulfil instructions and avoid prohibitions. If they leave out what they have been instructed to do, this 
is through their own choice. 3. On the day of resurrection the mercy of their Lord will appear to the people of faith in a 
way that they never imagined. 



















p*0 <4 61 

^Jgb <0J\ &$^A 
j j^)jj 

j j^- =C^ \y^\^\ *- 0 y^^S\ V£>\ 


y 


ijc)\j^ — 4y~ y y& (0 

(^)o^jj§G y}^yj^£\ 


y 




\y^\ i, 

0 Qjj^zA 


J .\ * 

10 j^L\ <3 





<0 '---;>! 



(0 The people of Paradise on this day, which is 
the day of resurrection, will be preoccupied from 
thinking about others, because of the permanent 
bliss and supreme success they will see. They will 
be enjoying that happily. 

(0 They and their spouses will be comfortably sit¬ 
ting on couches under lush shades in Paradise. 

0 In this Paradise they will have various types of 
wholesome fruits such as grapes, figs and pome¬ 
granates and they will have any type of delight or 
bliss that they ask for. Whatever they ask for they 
will get. 

(0 Over and above this bliss they will have peace 
that they will get, as a statement from a Lord Who 
is merciful to them. When He will greet them with 
peace they will attain peace and safety from all 
sides and they will obtain the greeting that no other 
greeting can surpass. 

<0 The idolaters will be told on the day of resur¬ 
rection: Step aside from the believers. It is not ap¬ 
propriate for them to be with you because of the 
disparity in your recompense and theirs and in your 
attributes and theirs. 

0 Did I not advise and instruct you on the tongues 
of My messengers and say to you: O children of 
Adam! Do not follow Satan by committing various 
types of disbelief and sins. Satan is a clear enemy to 
you. How can any sensible person follow an enemy 
of his who has made his enmity clear! 

0 I instructed you, O children of Adam, to worship 
Me alone and not to associate anything as partners 
to me. Worshipping Me alone and following Me is 
a straight path that leads to My pleasure and entry 
into Paradise. But you did not comply with my advice and instruction in that regard. 

0 Satan has misled many of you. Did you not have intellects which you could use, and with sound reasoning it would 
have lead you to obey your Lord and worship only Him (may He be glorified)? And your intellects should have been 
enough as a safeguard from you following Satan who is your clear enemy. 

0 This is Hell, which you were warned against in the world for your disbelief. It was a matter of the Ghaib to you, but 
today here you can witness it with your own eyes. 0 Enter it today and suffer from its heat remaining therein forever 
on account of your rejection of Allah in your worldly life. <0 Today, I will seal their mouths and they will become mute 
not able to deny the disbelief and sins they committed. Their hands will speak to us about what they did in the world. 
Their feet will testify about the sins they perpetrated and walked towards. (0 If I had willed to take away their sight I 
would have done so and they will not be able to see, just as I sealed their mouths and they were not able to speak. They 
would have then rushed towards the path to cross over it into Paradise, but it is unlikely that they will cross over when 
their sight is gone. 0 If I had willed to alter their form and make them sit on their feet I would have altered their form 
and made them sit on their feet, and they will not be able to move from their place nor will they be able to move forward 
nor backward. (0 Whoever’s life I extend by lengthening his lifespan, I return him to the stage of weakness. Do they not 
think with their intellect and understand that this abode is not one of permanence and immortality and that the everlasting 
abode is that of the Hereafter! (0 I did not teach Muhammad (peace be upon him) poetry and nor is that appropriate for 
him, because it is not his nature and his disposition does not demand it so that you can claim that he is a poet. What I 
have taught him is only a admonition and a clear Qur’an for those who ponder over it. It is not poetry. 0 To warn whose 
hearts are alive and they still have insight, for they are the ones who will benefit from it, And to establish the punishment 
against the disbelievers by making our signs manifest to them leaving them with no excuse. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The people of Paradise will be happily occupied with everything their souls desire, eyes find delight in and what they 
wish for. 2. The person with a heart is one who is purified by the Qur’an and who increases his knowledge of it and 
practice. The Qur’an for his heart is like rain for land that is fertile and pure. 3. The limbs of a person - which were an 
aid for their owner on the world - will become a witness against him on the day of resurrection. 




Part 23 





















to 






@ Have they not seen that I have created livestock 
for them, and they control the affairs of that live¬ 
stock by doing with it whatever they require? 

@ I have made the livestock serviceable for them 
and made it submissive to them; they ride on the 
backs of some and transport their loads, and they 
also consume some of its meat. 

@ They also have benefits in the livestock oth¬ 
er than just riding and consuming its meat i.e. its 
wool, bristles, fur and value, which they use to 
make spreads and clothing. They can also drink of 
its milk. So, will they not show gratitude to Allah 
who has blessed them with these favours, and oth¬ 
ers? 

@ The idolaters have taken other deities instead 
of Allah whom they worship, hoping that they will 
help them and save them from the punishment of 
Allah. 

@ Those deities that they have taken are not able to 
help themselves, let alone help whoever worships 
them instead of Allah. The worshippers, together 
with their idols, will all be brought to the punish¬ 
ment but will all protest innocence from one an¬ 
other. 

(Sjj) O Messenger! Do not let their statements grieve 
you: that you have not been sent as a messenger, or 
that you are a poet, and other slander they fire to¬ 
wards you. Indeed, I know what they say privately 
and publicly, nothing is hidden from Me and I will 
requite them for it. 

(jp Does the human who rejects the resurrection af¬ 
ter death not ponder that I created him from semen, 
then he went through different phases until he was 
bom and developed, turning into an argumentative and quarrelling creation? Does he not ponder over that to conclude 
that resurrection is possible? 

(Sjp This disbeliever is heedless and ignorant when he uses decayed bones to prove the impossibility of resurrection, say¬ 
ing, “Who will resurrect us?” whilst having forgotten his own creation from non-existence. 

(jp O Muhammad! Say to him in reply: “Whoever created these bones in the first place will bring them back to life, be¬ 
cause the one who created them initially is not incapable of returning life to them; He (may He be glorified) is the knower 
of everything, nothing is hidden from Him.” 

The being who has made for you, O people, lush green trees from which you are able to extract fire by igniting them. 
So the being who combined two opposites: the moisture of the green trees and the fire ignited from them, is also capable 
of reviving the dead. 

(Sf§5 Is not the one who created the heavens and the earth despite their grandeur, also capable of bringing the dead back to 
life, after causing their death? Of course! He is definitely capable of it; He is the creator who created all creations and He 
knows them all, so nothing is hidden from Him. 

(5§S) The authority and prestige of Allah is such that when He intends to create something, all He says to it is “Be!” and so 
it happens as He intends it. His intending to give life, cause death, and resurrect is also like that. 

(jp So Allah is glorified and free of the incapability the idolators ascribe to Him. He is the one to whom belongs total 
authority over everything and He does as He wishes with it; the keys to everything are in His Hands and you shall all 
return to Him in the Hereafter, where He will requite you over your deeds. 

Beneficial Points: 

1. From among the favours and privileges of granted be Allah to the people, is that He has subdued the livestock for them 
and made them usable to the people for their necessities, i.e. mounting, consuming their meat and milk. 2. From among 
the attributes of Allah is that His knowledge encompasses all His creation in all its conditions, at all times. He knows well 
the state of those buried in the earth from those whose bodies have decayed and those who body parts remain. And He 
knows the hidden and the apparent. 






mm 






























1 \~>h~> - 


rj' 




ot 


¥> 


Hk 


Surah As-Saf-fat (The Rows) 

^ Themes of the Surah: Emphasis is placed on 
the issue of clearing Allah of whatever the idolaters 
attribute wrongly to Him, and explaining why their 
claims regarding the angels and Jinn are false. 

® Explanation: (jj) I take an oath on the angels 
who form compact rows in their worship, jj} And I 
also take an oath on the angels who drive the rain- 
clouds and send them to wherever I command they 
send rain. @ And I take an oath in the angels who 
recite the Qur’an. @ O people! Indeed, your true 
deity is one and has no partner: He is Allah, jjj The 
lord of the heavens; the lord of the earth; the lord 
of what is between the two, and the lord of the sun 
in all its rising and setting places throughout the 
year. @ Indeed, I have beautified the nearest of the 
heavens to the earth with a beautiful decoration: the 
stars that are like sparkling jewels to the eyesight, 
jjj) And I have protected the nearest sky from every 
rebellious satan, who abstains from my obedience, 
with the shooting stars. jjS) These satans are not able 
to hear the angels in the heavens, when they dis¬ 
cuss the law and decree of Allah they are inspired 
with. They are bombarded with shooting stars from 
all sides, jjj) To exile them and drive them away 
from eavesdropping. And in the Hereafter they will 
suffer a painful, everlasting punishment which will 
not end. @ Except for those satans who happen to 
quickly snatch something; a statement that the an¬ 
gels discuss among themselves which the people of 
earth have not yet received information of. A shoot¬ 
ing star then goes after it and bums it. Sometimes, 
the satan is able to pass that information on to its 
companion before it is burnt by the shooting star, 
and it reaches the fortune-tellers, who tell a hun¬ 
dred lies with it. @> O Muhammad! So ask the disbelf! 
greater in form than other things that Allah has created from the heavens, the earth and the angels?” Indeed, Allah created 
them from sticky clay, so how could they deny the resurrection when they were created from such a weak substance? @ 
O Muhammad! You are amazed at the power of Allah and His management of the affairs of His creation; you are aston¬ 
ished at the idolaters rejecting the resurrection. While these idolaters mock at what you say regarding the resurrection, 
due to their extreme denial of it. @ If these idolaters were to be advised with any advice, they would not take heed from 
it and would not benefit, because of their hard-heartedness. @ And when they witness a miracle from the miracles of the 
Prophet (peace be upon him) that prove his truthfulness, they exaggerate in showing astonishment and mocking it. dj) 
And they say, “This thing that Muhammad has brought is nothing but clear sorcery.” @ “So when we die and become 
dust and decomposed, crumbling bones, will we be resurrected alive after that? That is indeed, far-fetched.” @ “Will 
our ancient forefathers who dies before us also be resurrected?” @ O Muhammad! Say to them in reply: “Yes, you shall 
be resurrected after you have turned into dust and decomposed bones, and your forefathers will also be resurrected; you 
will all be resurrected in the condition that you are in a despised and humiliating state.” @ It will only be one blow of 
the trumpet (the second blowing), and suddenly they will all be looking at the horrors of the Day of Judgement, awaiting 
what Allah will do with them. ^ The idolaters who reject the resurrection say, “May we be doomed! This is the Day of 
Requital on which Allah will requite His servants for whatever deeds they sent forth in their worldly life!” @ It will be 
said to them: “This is the Day of Judgement between the servants, which you used to deny and reject in the world!” @ 
On that day, it will be said to the angels, “Gather the idolaters and their like, who wronged due to their ascribing partners 
with Allah; all those who followed them in rejection, and all the idols they used to worship instead of Allah. And show 
them all the path to the hellfire; lead them on to it and drive them towards it, because it is their abode.” @ On that day, 
it will be said to the angels, “Gather the idolaters and their like, who wronged due to their ascribing partners with Allah; 
all those who followed them in rejection, and all the idols they used to worship instead of Allah. And show them all the 
path to the hellfire; lead them on to it and drive them towards it, because it is their abode.” @ “And hold them back for a 
while before entering them into the hellfire for them to give account, because they are to be questioned. Then after that, 
drive them towards the hellfire.” 

® Beneficial Points: 1. Allah decorated the nearest heaven with stars for many beneficial reasons, from them are: to 
achieve beautification and protection from rebellious satans. 2. The Sirat is a bridge over the hellfire which the people of 
Paradise will cross, and upon it the feet of the people of the fire will slip. 


ClP i J ($) 



luv/Tvaiv 






















oliUaJ'ojji' 


uv 








C^ ^\Va) \ j ( ^ ) i)j clll3u (^P 

^yloLiu t • >5 $sllx> L^ ( ^ ) f AJ-AV* j ^ 

(J^jj^ <J\ X^ \ (j ^ (^J 



© And it will be said to them in rebuke, “What is the 
matter with you that you are not helping each other like 
you used to in the world, and you used to claim that 
your idols would help you?” © Rather, today they are 
submissive to the command of Allah and humiliated, 
they will not help each other because of their incapa¬ 
bility to do so, and because of their lack of strategies. 
©And they will turn to each other blaming each other 
and arguing, when shifting the blame and arguing will 
be of no use. © The followers will say to the leaders, 
“O our seniors! You use to approach us in matters of 
religion and truth, and would beautify for us disbelief, 
ascribing partners with Allah and sins, while scaring us 
away from the truth that the messengers brought from 
Allah.” ©The leaders will say to the followers: “The 
matter is not as you claim it is. Rather, you yourselves 
were upon disbelief and were not believers; you were 
the rejectors.” © “O followers! We had no power or 
authority over you such that we cause you to disbelieve, 
ascribe partners with Allah or commit sins. Rather, you 
were people who transgressed the limit in disbelief and 
deviance yourselves; we were not the ones who led you 
astray.” © “So the promise of Allah is now imposing 
on us and on you, when He said, “I will surely fill Hell 
with you and those of them that follow you all togeth¬ 
er.” (Sad: 85), and because of that we are inevitably 
going to taste whatever our Lord has promised.” © 
“So we called you towards deviance and disbelief; we 
had deviated from the path of guidance, but all you did 
was that you followed us because of your disposition 
to incline towards disbelief and deviance.” © So the 
followers and the leaders will share in the punishment 
on the Day of Judgement; none will benefit the other 
in any way because they were all partners in deviance 
and disbelief in the world. © Indeed, just as I did with 
these people by making them taste the punishment, I will do the same with other criminals by joining the followers and leaders in 
the punishment, each in proportion to whatever they deserve of it. © Indeed, these idolaters, when it would be said to them in the 
world, “There is no deity worthy of worship except Allah” so that they could act upon its requirements and leave everything that 
contradicted it, they would reject answering the call to it and submitting to it out of arrogance from the truth and showing haugh¬ 
tiness to it. © And they would say, justifying their disbelief: “Should we leave the worship of our idols because of the words of a 
mad poet?” intending through this statement of theirs: the Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him). ©Verily, they have spoken a 
grave lie, because the Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him) was not a madman nor a poet; he brought the Qur’an which calls 
towards the oneness of Allah and towards following His Messenger. He corroborated the message of monotheism and affirmation 
of the afterlife the messengers brought from Allah; he did not contradict them in anything. © O idolaters! You are surely going 
to suffer the painful punishment on the Day of Judgement due to your disbelief and rejection of the messengers. © O idolaters! 
Your requital will only be for the disbelief and sins you used to commit in the world. © However, the believing servants of Allah 
whom Allah chose for His worship, and they sincerely devoted worship to Him, will be in a place of safety from this punishment. 
© For those sincere servants will be a special provision granted to them by Allah, well-known for its purity, beauty and eternity. 
© From this special provision will be that they are provided with the purest of fruits they ever eat and desire; on top of that they 
will be honoured with their ranks being raised and being able to see the blessed face of Allah. © All that they will get in the per¬ 
manent gardens of everlasting bliss, which will never expire or cease to exist. © They will lean on thrones opposite to and facing 
one another; each one happy to meet his brother. © Glasses of wine, clear like flowing water, shall be passed around them. © 
White in colour, whoever drinks from it will enjoy a complete sensation. © It will not be like the wine of the world; there will 
be no intoxication that clouds the minds, nor will it give its drinkers headaches. The bodies and minds of its drinkers will remain 
safe. © In Paradise, they will also have chaste wives with beautiful eyes, who will not longingly look towards anyone other than 
their husbands. ©In their white complexation blended with a tinge of redness, it will be as if they were ostrich eggs covered by 
feathers from the wind and dust; protected and untouched by any hand. © The people of Paradise will turn to one another asking 
about their past, and what happened to them in the world. © One of the believers will say, “Indeed, I had a companion in the 
world who would deny the resurrection.” 

0 Beneficial Points: 1. The cause of the punishment of the disbelievers is evil deeds, which are ascribing partners with Allah 
and committing sins. 2. From among the bounties the people of Paradise will be granted is their gathering with one another and 
being able to see one another. This is from the perfection of happiness. 


I (£) i(^) I 

0 


| As-Saf-fiit | 

447 


Part 23 f 


















@ He would say to me in denial and mockingly, “O c&\ 5k -t i A g 

my friend! Are you one of those who believe in the 
resurrection of the dead?” 

(jp “When we die and turn into dust and decayed 
bones, will we then be resurrected and requited for 
our deeds we did in the world?” 

(SjjS) His believing companion will say to his com¬ 
panions of the people of Paradise: “Take a look 
with me; let us see the outcome of that companion 

of mine who used to deny the resurrection.” ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ 

(Sjj) So he will take a look and see his companion in \ 

the middle of hell. 

(j| He will say: “O my companion! By Allah, you 
were close to dooming me to the hellfire by calling 
me towards disbelief and denying the resurrection!” 

@ “Had it not been for Allah blessing me with 
guidance to faith and the ability to accept it, I would 
have been one of those brought to the punishment 
like you.” 

And after he finishes talking to his companion from 
the people of the hellfire, he turns towards his com¬ 
panions from the people of Paradise, addressing 
them saying: @ “We, the people of Paradise, will 
never die.” @ “Except the first death of ours in the 
world. Instead, we will live forever in Paradise and 
will not be punished like the disbelievers will be.” 

@ “Indeed, this requital of ours which our Lord 
has given us, i.e entry into Paradise, living in it for¬ 
ever and salvation from the hellfire, is the greatest, 
unparallelled success.” It is for requital like this 
the workers should strive for, because this is the 
profitable trade. {§p Is that aforementioned bounty 
which Allah has prepared for His servants whom 


o jS J \s {^) 

-— rO jS/, 


^ 0 <5j)u£*J\ 

(Jl? j 3 j 





JLjLAs ^j>Llo\5 

(3) 



As-gaf-fit y 448 


Part 23 


He chose to obey Him, better and more virtuous in rank and honour, than the tree of Zaqqum which has been cursed in 
the Qur’an? It is the food of the disbelievers, which neither nourishes nor satisfies hunger. ({§p I have made this tree a 
trial, with which those who do wrong through disbelief and sins are tested, when they say: “Indeed, fire consumes trees, 
so it is impossible that it grows in the hellfire.” @ Indeed, the tree of Zaqqum is a disgusting tree, and is one that comes 
out of the depth of hell. The fruits that come out of it are ugly in appearance, like the heads of satans. The ugliness in 
appearance is a sign of ugliness in nature, which means they revolting in taste. Indeed, the disbelievers will eat from 
its bitter, ugly fruits, and fill their empty bellies with them. Then, after having eaten them, they will have a disgusting, 
boiling cocktail to drink. @ Then, their return after that will be to the punishment of hell; they will move from one pun¬ 
ishment to another. @ Indeed, these disbelievers found their forefathers astray from the path of guidance and followed 
them blindly without proof of their truth. So they hastily followed the footsteps of their forefathers in deviance, as if 

they were harassed and forced into doing so. @ Verily, the majority of people before them also went astray. So O Messen¬ 
ger, those to whom you have been sent are not the first to go astray. @ Verily, I sent to the previous nations messengers 
who would warn them of the punishment of Allah, but they disbelieved. @ O Messenger! See what the outcome was of 
the nations who were warned by their messengers but did not accept their warning! Indeed, their outcome was entering 
into the hellfire having to live in it forever due to their disbelief and rejection of their messengers. @ Except for those 
whom Allah chose to believe in Him and His oneness; they were saved from the punishment which was the outcome of 
the disbelieving rejectors. @ Verily, My Prophet Noah (peace be upon him) called out to Me when he supplicated against 
his people who had rejected him. I am the best of answerers; I quickly answered his supplication against his people. 
And I saved him, together with members of his household and the believers with him from the harm of his people and 
from drowning in the great flood, which was sent upon the disbelievers from his people. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Success through achieving the bounties of Paradise is the greatest success. It is this kind of reward the workers should 
try and strive towards. 2. Indeed, the food of the people of the hellfire will be Az-Zaqqum: bitter, foul-smelling, difficult 
to swallow, painful to eat and disgusting fruits. 3. Allah answered the supplication of Noah (peace be upon him) to de¬ 
stroy his nation; Allah is the best answerer and the best to call out to. 



















© I saved his family members and his believing 
followers only, because I drowned the others from 
his disbelieving nation. © And I left a good leg¬ 
acy for him in the nations that would come after, 
who would praise Noah and always mention him 
with good. © It is a security and safety for Noah 
from the following nations saying evil regard¬ 
ing him. Instead, praise and positive mention of 
him will remain. © Indeed, I grant those who do 
good through their worship and obedience to Me 
alone, the same type of reward I granted to Noah. 
© Noah was definitely one of My servants who 
believed and acted according to My obedience. © 
Then, I drowned the rest by the flood I sent upon 
them. None of them remained. © Indeed, Abraham 
was someone on the same religion as Noah, and he 
also called to the Oneness of Allah. © Remember 
when he came to his Lord with a heart pure from 
ascribing partners to Allah and from doubts, full of 
sincerity to Allah only wanted good for the crea¬ 
tion. © When he said to his father and his idol¬ 
atrous nation, rebuking them, “What do you wor¬ 
ship instead of Allah?” © “O my people, do you 
prefer to worship idols besides Allah basing your 
worship on a completely fabricated lie?” © “O 
my people! What do you think will happen when 
you meet the Lord of the worlds, while you used to 
worship things other than Him? What do you think 
He will do to you?” © So Abraham took a glance 
at the stars, hatching a plan to come out of having 
to go out with his people. © He said, presenting an 
excuse from having to go with his people to their 
festival, “I am sick.” © So they left him behind and 
went. © He turned towards the idols they would 
worship instead of Allah, and said mocking them, 
“Will you not eat from the food the idolaters make 
for you?” © “What is the matter with you that you do not speak, nor answer whoever asks you? Can this type of thing 
be worshipped instead of Allah?” © Then, Abraham started hitting them with his right hand, intending to break them. © 
So the worshippers of these idols came rushing to him. © But Abraham countered them with steadfastness, and said to 
them rebuking them, “Do you worship idols instead of Allah, which you carve with your own hands?” © “While Allah 
(may He be glorified) is the one who created your bodies and your actions; the making of these idols are also from your 
actions, so He is most deserving that you worship Him alone and not ascribe partners with Him. © When they became 
speechless to his clear reasoning they resorted to violence, and consulted with each other about what they should do with 
Abraham. They said, “Build a structure from him, fill it with firewood and set it on fire, then throw him into it.” © So the 
people of Abraham intended to do evil to Abraham by destroying him so they could be saved from him, but I made them 
the losers when I made the fire cool and safe for him. © Abraham said, “I am going to emigrate to my Lord and leave the 
city of my people so that I am able worship Him. My Lord will guide me to whatever is good for me in the world and the 
Hereafter.” © “O my Lord! Grant me a pious child who will be a means of help for me and a substitute for me from my 
people in the wilderness.” © So I answered his supplication for him and gave him news which pleased him, when I gave 
him the good news of a child who would grow old and become forbearing. This child was Ishmael (peace be upon him). 
© When Ishmael grew into a youth and reached working age, his father Abraham saw a dream. The dreams of prophets 
are a form of divine revelation, so Abraham said to his son, informing him of the meaning of this dream, “O my son! 
Indeed, I saw in my sleep that I am slaughtering you; what is your opinion in the matter?” Ishmael replied to him saying, 
“O my father! Do whatever Allah has commanded you to do in slaughtering me. You will find me one of those who are 
patient and content with the order of Allah.” 

® Beneficial Points: 1. From among the manifestations of the bounties of Allah upon Noah are: Noah being saved 
together with those who believed with him; his progeny being the ancestors for the rest of humanity after them, and the 
positive mention and praise remaining for him. 2. The objective of the Prophets and messengers is one: calling towards 
the oneness of Allah and the roots of good character and virtue. 3. Allah creates everything including the actions mankind 
chooses to do. 4. Emigration and seclusion is legislated when a Muslim is unable to uphold the tenets of his religion. The 
first person to have done so was Abraham (peace be upon him). 5. The son who was about to be slaughtered according 
to the implication of these verses was Ishmael (peace be upon him), because He was the one given glad tidings of in the 
first place. As for Isaac (peace be upon him). He was given glad tidings of after Ishmael (peace be upon him). 








Ssl 


/%£) | 

j\i 

0 I 


As-Saf-iat 


Part 23 






















Di£ 

I® 




a^EJrtr 


\1S | 

**'**<- 


{^3 

ILxo .fshlw) !* A^.a.4-iAJylUgji /w-y^a l^L^Xjj)/rtl 

o^J ^ 6 j^S a$*_y*$R 

^ ^ Q a ^ ^~/3 

L^y\^j(Nn); ijb\ c 


-L? 


|f| So when they submitted to Allah and obeyed 
him, Abraham laid his son down on his forehead, 
to carry out the order given to him to slaughter his 
son. 

HI I called out to Abraham while he was about to 
carry out the order of Allah to slaughter his son, 
saying: “O Abraham!” 

(jf| “You have fulfilled the dream you saw in your 
sleep by resolving to slaughter your son. Just as 
I rewarded you by freeing you of this great trial, 

I also reward those who do good by saving them 
from trials and difficulties.” 
ff| Indeed, this was a clear test which Abraham 
passed. 

(jf| And I set Ishmael free in exchange for a huge 
ram which was to be slaughtered instead of him. 

|f| I preserved good praise for Abraham to remain 
among the following nations. 

Hi As a commemoration for Abraham from Allah, 
and a prayer to keep him safe from every harm and 
difficulty. 

Hi Just as I requited Abraham with this reward for 
his obedience, I also reward those who do good. 

(j|| Indeed, Abraham was one of My believing serv¬ 
ants who fulfilled the demands of his servitude to 
Me. 

|p) And I gave him glad tidings of another son who 
would become a Prophet and a pious servant: he 
was Isaac. It was another reward for his obedience 
to Allah by resolving to slaughter his only son, Ish¬ 
mael. 

|!| And I showered upon him and his son Isaac My 
special blessings and gave them both many boun¬ 
ties, from which one was an increase in offspring. There were those in their progeny who did good by obeying their Lord, 
and those who clearly wronged themselves by disbelief and committing sins. 

@ And verily I favoured Moses and his brother Aaron with messengership. 

|!| I saved them and their nation, the Israelites, from Pharaoh enslaving them and from drowning. 

|f| I also helped them against Pharaoh and his armies, so they had the upper hand over their enemies. 

I gave Moses and his brother Aaron the Torah; a clear book from Allah in which there was no doubt. 

HI I also guided them towards the straight path in which there was no deviance. It was the path of the religion of Islam 
which led to the pleasure of the Creator (may He be glorified). 

|jj And I also preserved for them positive mention and good praise among the following nations. 

HI As a commemoration from Allah for them, in praise of them and as a prayer for safety from every harm. 

@ Just as I requited Moses and Aaron with this good reward, I also reward those who do good by obeying their Lord. 
HI Indeed, Moses and Aaron were two of My servants who believed in me and strove to do that which I legislated for 
them. 

HI Indeed, Elias was one of the messengers sent by his Lord. He blessed him with messengership and prophethood. 

HI Remember when he said to his people whom he was sent towards from the Israelites, “O my people! Will you not 
fear Allah by fulfilling His commands, of which is monotheism, and refraining from the things He has not allowed, from 
which is ascribing partners with Him?” 

HI “Do you worship your idol BaT instead of Allah and leave the worship of Allah who is the best of creators?” 

HI “Allah is your lord who created you and created your forefathers before you; He is the most deserving of worship, not 
anything else like the idols which cannot benefit nor harm.” 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The statement of Ishmael: “You will find me, if Allah wills, of the steadfast.” was the cause of Allah granting him the 
ability to be patient, because he entrusted the matter to Allah. 2. The saying of Allah: “And when they had both submit¬ 
ted” is proof that Abraham and Ishmael (peace be upon them) both were at the peak of their submission to the command 
of Allah. 




450 






















(n£) l(JjvJ ij> jSS 

^iCjD <3 ($) 

^ ^ ^ ^ 9 *~ *+ •$ 
j£3i3 0 ^ (3) i(3 

J jJ&& 9 *3*L\ ^ ( ft) 

^ 6^ 0 3) 

't 9y i o ^ 9 -C 

_3^ i_ii\ 4 SL 5 , <31 


05 o>>=^ , 


i,4dS 


D~fc 


^ 0 ^>i->- 


Cu-^ 


|p The only response of his nation was that they re¬ 
jected him, and because of their rejection they will 
be brought to the punishment. 

HI Except for those who were believers and devot¬ 
ed their worship to Allah alone; they will be saved 
from being brought to the punishment. 

|J| And I also preserved for him positive mention 
and good praise among the following nations. 

(J§| As a commemoration from Allah and praise for 
Elias. 

(jp Just as I requited Elias with this good reward, 
I also reward those of My believing servants who 
do good. 

|p Indeed, Elias was one of My true believing serv¬ 
ants who are sincere in their belief in Me. 

(jp And indeed, Lot was one of the messengers of 
Allah who were sent to their people as bearers of 
good news and warners. 

Ip So remember when I saved him and members 
of his household from the punishment that was sent 
upon his people. 

|p Except for his wife, because she was a woman 
whom the punishment of her people included with¬ 
in it, due to her being a disbeliever like them. 

|p Then, I destroyed the remainder of his people 
who rejected him and did not believe in what he 
had brought. 

|p O people of Makkah! Indeed, you pass by their 
dwellings in you journeys towards the Levant in the 
morning. 

|p And likewise, you also pass by them at night. 
So do you not understand and take heed from the 
outcome of these people after they rejected, disbe¬ 
lieved and committed indecency, indecent behaviour, immorality, immoral behaviour, sexual indecency, sexual immor¬ 
tality which was unprecedented? |p And indeed, Jonah was one of the messengers of Allah who were sent to their people 
as bearers of good news and warners. |p Remember when he became angry over his people and left them, boarding a 
ship full of passengers and goods. |p The ship was close to sinking because of its load, so the passengers drew lots to 
throw some of them overboard, fearing its sinking because of too many passengers. Jonah was one of the names that were 
drawn, and so they threw him in to the sea. |p So when they threw him into the sea, a whale took him and swallowed 
him. He was to face the blame that was to come to him, because of him going to the sea without permission from his Lord. 
Ip Had it not been that Jonah was one of those who would remember Allah abundantly before whatever afflicted him, 
and had it not been for his glorifying Allah in the stomach of the whale . |p he would have remained in the stomach of 
the whale until the Day of Judgement, with it having become his grave. @ So I took him from the stomach of the whale 
and placed him on a land barren of trees and buildings, in the state that he was physically weak because of having stayed 
in the stomach of the whale for a while. |p I then made a gourd tree grow for him on that barren earth, which would give 
him shade. |p And I sent him back to his people, their number being a hundred thousand and more. |p They brought faith 
and believed in whatever He brought, so Allah granted them enjoyment in their worldly lives until their fixed lifetimes 
expired. |p O Muhammad! So ask these idolaters, idolaters a rebuking question: “Do you attribute for Allah daughters 
which you yourselves dislike, while attributing sons for yourselves whom you love? What kind of distribution is this?” 
IP How could they claim the angels are female when they were not present at the time of their creation and did not wit¬ 
ness it? ||J) Listen carefully! Indeed, the idolaters, idolaters from their attributing lies unto Allah. |p attribute offspring 
to Him, and indeed, they are liars in this claim of theirs. ||| Would Allah prefer daughters for Himself which you dislike, 
over sons which you like? Never! 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The divine custom of Allah which will never change is: saving the believers and destroying the disbelievers. 2. It is 
necessary to take heed and lessons from the outcomes of those who rejected the messengers, so that whatever came to 
them, does not come to us. 3. It is permissible in the Sharia to draw lots because of the statement of Allah: “And he drew 
lots and was among the losers.” 






As-Saf-fit 


451 


Part 23 























<$)o 9^jJ5U3^S^(\v>; ^aUe^^\lVIf^ \ ^ Oyu^> 

%$(™) Qj^l^^0^ ^ J 4 ] 

\ 5^^^y^x4-6s5 


J^ljCwA] 

"I / 


$ ^ 


[wy Ojy^i^Jj^ 

(^ cj)^^ C^j jJ^~\j (^J) \ ^jLi^Ilr^ (j£) E 


(jp O idolaters, what is wrong with you that you 
make this unjust judgment where you make daugh¬ 
ters for Allah and sons for yourself? 

HI Would you not take admonition of this wrong 
belief you are on? If you were to take heed, you 
would stop saying such as statement. 

(Jf| Or do you have a clear proof from a divine 
scripture or a messenger from Allah? 

Ip Then bring your book which bears for you evi¬ 
dence of this if you are true in what you claim. 

(jp And the idolaters made blood ties between Allah 
and the angels when they claimed the angels are Al¬ 
lah’s daughters and their mothers are the elite jinns. 
But the jinns already know Allah will bring them to 
be reckoned, so if there was lineage between Him 
and them he would not bring them for that. 

HI Pure is Allah and exalted from what the idola¬ 
ters describe Him with of that which does not befit 
Him, such as children, partners. 

Ip Except Allah’s chosen servants, as they do not 
describe Allah except with the qualities of majesty 
and perfection which are befitting for Him. 

HI So you, O idolaters, and what you worship be¬ 
sides Allah. 

HI You cannot misguide anyone from the true re¬ 
ligion. 

(|f| Except one whom Allah has decreed is from the 
people of hell, as Allah will carry out His decree re¬ 
garding him and so he will disbelieve and enter the 
fire. As for you and your Allahs, you do not have 
power over that. 

HI And the angels said, stating their servitude to 


Allah and their being free of what the idolaters 
claimed: “There is nobody amongst us except that he has a known position in Allah’s worship and obedience. 

HI And we, the angels, are standing in rows in Allah’s worship and His obedience. 

(@ And we declare Him pure of qualities and descriptions which do not befit Him”. 

(jf| -|z| And the idolaters from the people of Makkah used to say before Muhammad (peace be upon him) was sent: “If 
we had a book of the previous people, such as the Torah for example, we would have worshipped Allah sincerely”. But 
they are lying in that, as Muhammad (peace be upon him) brought them the Qur’an but they disbelieved in it. So soon 
they will know the severe punishment that is waiting for them on the day of judgment. 

And My word to My messengers, which nobody can adjust or refute, has already passed that they will be helped 
against their enemies through the proof and strength I have favoured them with. (^) And My word to My messengers, 
which nobody can adjust or refute, has already passed that they will be helped against their enemies through the proof and 
strength I have favoured them with. ||| And victory is for My army which fights in My way, so that My word is the high¬ 
est. |f| So turn away, O Messenger, from these stubborn idolaters until a time which Allah knows, until the time of their 
punishment comes. U| And look at them when the punishment comes upon them, for they themselves will see when see¬ 
ing will not benefit. @) Then do these idolaters hastily seek the punishment of Allah? |z| Then when Allah’s punishment 
comes upon them, what a bad morning will theirs be! @ And turn away, O Messenger, from them when Allah decides 
their punishment. (Jf| And look, for these people will see the punishment and punishment of Allah that comes upon them. 
HI O Muhammad, exhalt your Lord declaring his glorification, the Lord of Honour, and exalt Him above the qualities 
of deficiency the idolaters describe Him with. |I| And Allah’s greetings and His praise be for His noble messengers. (jj| 
And all praise is for Allah, as He is deserving of it, and He is Lord of all the creation. They have no lord besides Him. 

Beneficial Points: 

1. The divine custom of Allah is to help the messengers and those who inherit and pass on the knowledge of the message 
through proof and dominance, and there is a great glad tiding in the verses that the one described as being from Allah’s 
army will be dominant and helped. 2. The verses contain proof of the helplessness of the idolaters and their idols from 
misguiding anyone, and a glad tiding for Allah’s chosen servants that Allah through His power will save them from the 
misguidance of those individuals who are misguided and aim to lead others astray. 


1 























Surah Saad 


<!*> Topic of the Surah: 

It focuses on the issue of disputing falsehood and 
its outcome. 

® Explanation: @ Saad. By the Qur’an contain¬ 
ing reminder. The discussion on similar letters has 
already passed in the beginning of Surah Al-Baqa- 
rah. I swear by the Qur’an which is full of admoni¬ 
tion, reminding mankind that which benefits them 
in their worldly life and the Afterlife. The matter 
is not as the idolaters think, namely that Allah has 
partners beside Him. jjj) But the disbelievers are 
in fanaticism and arrogance towards the oneness 
of Allah, and in opposition to Muhammad (peace 
be upon him) and hatred for him. @ How many 
generations who denied their messengers before 
them have I destroyed, they called out seeking help 
when the punishment fell upon them. But the time 
was not the time to be saved from the punishment 
where seeking help from Him would benefit them. 
© And they expressed surprise when a messenger 
came to them from themselves to warn them of Al¬ 
lah’s punishment if they remain in their disbelief. 
And the disbelievers said when they saw the proof 
for the truthfulness of what Muhammad (peace be 
upon him) brought: “This is a magician who per¬ 
forms magic on people, and a liar in claiming that 
he is a messenger from Allah who receives reve¬ 
lation. @ Has he made the numerous Allahs into 
one Allah, besides whom there is no Allah? This act 
of his is extremely strange”. @ And their leaders 
and elders went, saying to their followers: “Carry 
on with what you are upon and do not enter the re¬ 
ligion of Muhammad. Remain finn on worshipping 
your Allahs. That which Muhammad is calling you towards, namely worshipping one Allah, is something planned which 
he wants so that he can dominate over us and have followers for himself. @ We have not heard the oneness of Allah 
which Muhammad is calling us towards in what we found our fathers on nor in the religion of Jesus (peace be upon him). 
What we have heard from him is nothing but a lie and fabrication. @ Is it right that the Qur’an is revealed to him from 
amongst us and he is chosen for it, and it is not revealed to us whereas we are great leaders?” But these idolaters are in 
doubt about the revelation which is revealed to you. And they have not yet tasted the punishment of Allah, so they have 
been deceived due to their being given respite. If they were to taste it, they would not have the audacity to disbelieve in 
Allah and doubt what is revealed to you. @ Or do these denying idolaters have treasures of the grace of your Lord, the 
Mighty whom nobody can overpower, who gives what He wants to whom He wants? And from His treasures is prophet- 
hood, so He gives it to whom He wishes. It is not for them that they should give it to whom they want and stop it from 
whom they want. @) Or do they have the kingdom of the heavens and the earth, and possession of everything therein 
so they may chose who to give it to? If this is what claim they are making then let them adopt the means to go up to the 
heavens so they can then rule how they wish from above the heavens in who should be given and who should be held back 
from. @ These deniers of Muhammad (peace be upon him) are a defeated army like the armies which came before them 
who denied their messengers and so I destroyed them. So that will occur with this army as occurred with others. @ These 
deniers are not the first to deny, because the people of Noah, Aad, and the powerful Pharaoh denied before them. @ And 
Thamud, the people of Lot and the people of Shu’ayb denied. Those are the groups who were all united in their denial of 
the messengers and disbelief of what they brought. @ There is not a single one of these groups except that it denied the 
messengers. So Allah’s punishment was justified for them and His punishment befell them, even though it was delayed 
for a while. @ These deniers of Muhammad (peace be upon him) are not waiting except for the second blowing of the 
Trumpet in which there shall be no return. Then the punishment will fall upon them if they had died in a state of denial. 
@ And they said mockingly: “Our Lord, give us our share of punishment in the worldly life before the day of judgment”. 
® Beneficial Points: 1. Allah swore an oath by the great Qur’an, so it is necessary to receive it with faith and accept¬ 
ance, and to dedicate oneself to extracting its meanings. 2. The causes for the disbelievers to turn away from faith are: 
arrogance, tyranny, considering oneself above following the truth, and opposing Allah and the guidance of His Messenger 
(peace be upon him). 




















toi 






^ ^ \j i 




"\JCCa (. 


I 4jisL\ ^W^i VLju^>i 

^ 9 j)l »_^2^-\ \ »o ti\u\ L* 9 ; i-AL^-\ [ V^sS_‘< C&jj 

h£-^_^ xo J ^ ke o 2 

Ca£-y\y\S) I 






>jj> 


@ O Messenger, be patient on the things these de- 
niers say which do not please you, and remember 
My servant David, who had the power to fight his 
enemies and persevere in Allah’s obedience. He 
used to turn to Allah frequently through repentance 
and actions which please Him. 

© I subjugated the mountains with David. They 
would exalt with his exalting at the end of the day 
and its beginning at sunrise. 

© And I subjugated the birds held in the air. Each 
of them was obedient, exalting out of following 
him. 

© And I strengthened his kingdom through the 
awe, strength and help against his enemies I had 
given him. And I gave him prophethood and cor¬ 
rectness in his affairs. And I gave him clear elo¬ 
quence in every objective, and decisiveness in 
speech and wisdom. 

© O Messenger, has the news of the two disputants 
come to you, when they climbed upon the place of 
worship of David (peace be upon him)? 

© When they entered upon David suddenly, so he 
became frightened due to their strange act of enter¬ 
ing upon him in this most unusual of ways. When 
they saw his fear, they said: “Do not fear. We are 
two disputants, one of us having wronged the oth¬ 
er, so judge between us justly and do not be unjust 
when you judge between us, and guide us to the 
right path which is the path of correctness”. 

© One of the disputants said to David (peace be 
upon him): “This man is my brother. He has nine¬ 
ty-nine ewes and I have one ewe. He asked me to 
give him that too and he has overpowered me in 
proof’. 

@ Then David judged between them and addressed the claimant, saying: “Your brother has wronged you when he asked 
you to add your ewe to his ewes. And many partners oppress one another by taking their rights and not being fair, except 
the believers who do good actions, for they are fair with their partners and do not wrong them. But those attributed with 
that are few”. And David (peace be upon him) was convinced that I only put him to test through this dispute, so he sought 
forgiveness from his Lord and prostrated to get close to Him, and repented to Him. 

© So I responded to him and forgave him that. And he is amongst the close ones with Me, and for him is a good return 
in the Afterlife. 

@ O David, I made you a deputy on earth to execute worldly and religious rulings and judgments, so judge between peo¬ 
ple with justice. And do not follow desires in your judgement between people, by inclining towards one of the disputants 
due to relationship or friendship, or by turning away from him due to enmity, whereby desires will misguide you from 
Allah’s straight path. Those who go astray from Allah’s straight path will have a severe punishment due to their forgetting 
the day of reckoning, because if they were to remember it and fear it they would not incline to their desires. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The virtues of Allah’s Prophet David and the miracles Allah chose him with have been stated. 

2. The Prophets (peace be upon them) are protected from mistakes in conveying on Allah’s behalf, as the objective of 
messengership cannot be achieved except through that. However, sometimes certain things according to human nature, 
such as forgetfulness or absentmindedness from a ruling, occur from them, but Allah corrects them and quickly shows 
His grace to them. 

3. The scholars have proven the permissibility of partnership between two or more people from the saying of Allah: “And 
many associates oppress one another”. 


1 4^ l 9^1 i' )\ \ p\\'I j 

^ ''V ^ S ^ 


Part 23 

























too 




\^jpj \j£\* 4 \ (^)_j\si ^ 

5 i^fe^i5-^*SS®^S^s a\3\?s3^4J3SiS> 

S^\Si \Zzbj_j 0 F 
^-Laj Sj($) i-A^cLL Oj|\p (^-J^j^ ' V>* 

{^) ci 

j fflja£j^ ( rT ) C^J\ C^S-lWoqoJa\j | 

*j£zJi!i\ ^jkp c5 ^ $) ^2* I 

J ( 5 i^y 



J) And I did not create the heavens or the earth 
in vain, but rather I created them out of complete 
wisdom to prove the power of Allah and so that He 
is obeyed in them. That is the belief of those who 
deny the truth who believe they were created in 
vain. So woe to these disbelievers who believe this 
from the fire of hell on the Day of Judgment, when 
they die on the disbelief and bad opinion of Allah 
they are upon. 

(j| I will never make those who believe in Allah, 
follow His messenger and do good deeds like those 
who make the corruption on earth through disbelief 
and sins, nor will I make those who are mindful of 
their Lord by carrying out His orders and refrain¬ 
ing from His prohibitions like the disbelievers and 
hypocrites who are engrossed in sins. Making them 
both equal is an injustice which does not befit Al¬ 
lah. But rather Allah will reward the pious believers 
by entry into Paradise and punish the wretched dis¬ 
believers by entry into the fire, because they are not 
equal in Allah’s sight so their reward is not equal in 
His sight too. 

{jl This Qur’an is a book I revealed to you, O 
Prophet, abundant in good and benefit. I revealed 
it so that people ponder over its verses and contem¬ 
plate its meanings, and so that the people of enlight¬ 
ened superior intellect take lessons from it. 

And I granted David his son Solomon, as a 
favour from Me to him and a grace so that he is 
pleased. What an excellent servant Solomon was. 
He would abundantly repent and turn to Allah. 
@ Remember when at the time of Asr purebred fast 
horses were presented to him, standing on three feet 
with one foot raised. These purebred horses continued to be presented to him until sunset. 

<J) So Solomon said: “I preferred love of wealth, these horses being part of it, over the remembrance of my Lord until 
the sun set. 

@ Return these horses to me”. So they returned them to him, then he began striking their legs and necks with his sword. 
@ And I tested Solomon and put on his chair part of a child, and that was when he swore by Allah that he will sleep with 
all of his wives and each one of them will bring forth a horseman to strive in Allah’s way. But he did not say in this oath 
of his: “if Allah wills”. So he slept with all of them, but none of them gave birth except one who gave birth to part of a 
child. Then Solomon repented to his Lord. 

tjj) Solomon said: “My Lord, forgive me my sins and grant me a kingdom especially for me which no person will have 
after me. My Lord, You give abundantly and are very generous”. @ So I responded to him and made the wind subservient 
to him. It would obey his order, gently. There was no shaking in it, despite its strength and its fast movement. It would 
carry him wherever he wanted. @ And I made the satans subservient to him, complying with his orders. Some of them 
were builders and others were divers who would dive into the seas and take out pearls from them. And from the satans 
there were rebellious ones who were made subservient for him. They were tied up in shackles, unable to move. @ “O 
Solomon, this is My gift which I granted you in response to what you asked of Me. So give whom you want and stop 
from whom you want, as I will not take you to account in your giving or holding back”. @ And Solomon is amongst the 
close ones with us, and he has a good return which he will return to, and it is Paradise. @ O Messenger, remember My 
servant Job when he called upon Allah, his Lord: “The satan has afflicted Me with a tiring and tormentful matter”. @ So 
I said to him: “Strike your foot on the ground”. So he struck his foot on the ground, then water sprung forth for him from 
it, which he would drink and bathe from and through it, his difficulty and pain would go. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The Qur’an has been revealed for us to contemplate over it. 2. According to the soundness of a person’s heart and intel¬ 
ligence will be the admonition and benefit he takes away from the noble Qur’an. 3. It is necessary to maintain etiquette 
when going to people of virtue and position. 4. The verses contain proof for the famous principle: “Whoever leaves 
something for Allah, Allah gives him something better in its place”. 






E 


Part 23 



















@ So I responded to him and removed the difficul¬ 
ty he was affected by, and I gave him his family and 
added to them a like number of sons and grandsons, 
as a mercy from Me to him and a reward for his 
patience, and so that the people of superior intellect 
are reminded that the outcome of patience is ease 
and reward. @ When Job became angry with his 
wife, he swore an oath he will lash her a hundred 
times, so I said to him: “O Job, take a bunch of 
stalks in your hand and hit her with them, to fulfil 
your oath. And do not break the oath you made”. So 
he took a bunch of stalks and hit her with them. I 
found him to be patient in what I afflicted him with. 

What an excellent servant he was. He would turn to 
Allah abundantly. @ O Messenger, remember My 
servants I chose and the messengers I sent: Abra¬ 
ham, Isaac and Jacob. They were people of strength 
in Allah’s obedience and seeking His pleasure, and 
they were people of true insight into the truth. @ I 
favoured them with a special favour I chose them 
with, which was filling their hearts with the remem¬ 
brance of the abode of the Afterlife, preparing for 
it through good actions and calling people towards 
acting for it. @ And they were with Me amongst 
those I chose for My obedience and worship, and 
whom I selected to bear My message and convey it 
to the people. (Sj5 O Prophet, remember Ishmael, the 
son of Abraham, and remember Elisha, and remem¬ 
ber Dhul-Kifl, and praise them well as they deserve 
it. And all of these were amongst the chosen and 
selected in Allah’s sight. @ This is a reminder of 
these people through good praise in the Qur’an. 

And for the Mindful through carrying out the or¬ 
ders of Allah and refraining from His prohibitions is a good return in the abode of the Afterlife, jfp This good return is 
gardens of residence they will enter on the Day of Judgment, whose doors will be opened to welcome them. @ Reclining 
on couches which will be adorned for them. They will ask their attendants to present to them the many different types of 
fruit they will desire and the drinks they will desire, such as wine and so forth. ((§p And with them will be women, all of 
similar age, whose gaze will be limited only to their husbands. @ O Alah-conscious people, this is the pleasant reward 
you are being promised on the day of judgment for your good deeds you used to do in the world. @ This reward I have 
mentioned is My provision I will give to the Alah-conscious on the Day of Judgment, and it is continuous provision 
which will not pause or end. @ This that I mentioned is the reward of the Mindful. And those who trespass the limits 
of Allah through disbelief and sins will have a reward different to that of the Mindful, so for them is a bad return they 
shall return to on the day of judgment. @ This reward is hell which will surround them, and they will suffer its heat and 
flames. From it they will have a spread, so what an evil spread is theirs. @ This punishment is extremely hot water, and 
pus which will flow from the bodies of the people of hell being punished in it, so they should taste it as it is their drink. 
However it is a drink which does not quench thirst. @ And they will have another punishment like this punishment. 
They will have a number of various punishments they will be punished with in the Afterlife. @ And when the people of 
hellfire will enter, they will dispute with one another, cursing and disassociating from one another. When it will be said 
to those already in the fire: “This is a new group of those that will inhabit the fire with you, they will respond:” “May 
they not be welcome, they will suffer the punishment like we are suffering” The group of followers will say to their 
leaders who were followed: “But rather you, O leaders who were followed, no welcome to you, as you are what caused 
us this painful punishment by misguiding us and leading us astray”. What a terrible settlement this is, the settlement of 
hell fire for them all. @ The followers will say: “Our Lord, whoever lead us astray from the guidance after it came to us, 
double his punishment in the fire”. 

® Beneficial Points: 1. Whoever is patient upon difficulty, Allah will reward him with an immediate and future reward, 
and respond to his call when he calls upon Him. 2. The illness of Job (peace be upon him) was not repulsive, as he was 
a prophet who mixed with the people. 3. The verses contain proof that the husband may withhold himself from his wife 
to correct her, as did Job (peace be upon him) with his wife. 




















f 

r* 

O 

< 








}£& 

%j>^ 

1 ^ 53 *^ 03 ^ \j&*^ ^ 1 ) <y$*^ \ Cjj 

33> \)&ljt 3 0 ^ 0 by^y^ 0J33p 
J\s 3 H 

^ ^5^ \ ^ 0 C^c?*b^ 

\ Jkc^& ( 0 fjLWL^ /<^\j>*jl3 3 Vv* AJ3 

3 \s 0 3 ir^=^^ 0-5 (J*$C^ L 0 

c3^3 Lj/^3-t^^ ^ a^j c3 

cy^C^A^S^ 3^003^3^ 

^5 3^0 

^45}-^ 3 ^ 0 ^3^3 \ cJj) ^ (3! 0 o^3^-31 


40^. 




Saad 


Part 23 




@ And the arrogant transgressors will say: “Why 
do we not see with us in the fire men we used to 
consider in the world amongst the wretched who 
deserved punishment? 

@ Was our mocking them a mistake and so they 
did not deserve to be punished, or was our mocking 
them right, and they have entered the fire but we 
have not seen them yet?” 

@ This which has been mentioned to you, name¬ 
ly the arguments of the disbelievers on the Day of 
Judgment, is the truth in which there is no dispute 
or doubt. 

@ O Muhammad, say to the disbelievers from your 
people: “I am only a warner to you of Allah’s pun¬ 
ishment, lest it fall upon you due to disbelief and 
denying His messengers. And there is no Allah who 
deserves to be worshipped besides Allah, as He is 
unique in His greatness, qualities and names, and 
He is the Subduer who has subdued everything. So 
everything submits to Him. 

@ And He is the Lord of the heavens, the Lord of 
the earth and Lord of whatever is in between them. 
And He is Mighty in His kingdom, with nobody to 
overpower Him, and He is Forgiving of the sins of 
His servants who repent to Him”. 

|§jj) O Messenger, say to these deniers: “The Qur’an 
is a news of great status. 

You are turning away from this news of great 
status; you do not turn towards it. 

@ I do not have knowledge of the discussion be¬ 
tween the angels regarding the creation of Adam, if 
Allah had not revealed to me and taught me. 

(j|) Allah only reveals to me what He reveals, and I 


am a clear warner to you of His punishment”. 

@ Remember when your Lord said to the angels: “I am going to create a man from clay, and he is Adam (peace be upon 
him). 

dJ) So once I have proportioned his form, made his appearance right and blown My spirit into him, prostrate to him”, 
jjp) So the angels obeyed the command of their Lord, so all of them prostrated by way of greeting and honour, and none 
of them remained except that they prostrated to Adam. 

@ Besides Iblis who was too arrogant to prostrate. And through his being arrogant to the command of his Lord, he was 
from the disbelievers. 

(Sj) Allah said: “O Iblis, what stopped you from prostrating to Adam whom I created with My hands? Did pride stop you 
from prostrating or were you arrogant and haughty over your Lord from before?” 

<SjS) Iblis said: “I am better than Adam. You created me from fire and you created him from clay. And fire is a more noble 
substance than clay”. 

fj) Allah said to Iblis: “Get out of Paradise, because you are accursed and reviled. 

Cj) And you are to be rejected from Paradise until the day of recompense, which is the day of judgment”, 
jj Iblis said: “Give me respite and do not make me die until the day You raise Your servants”. 

<Sj) Allah said: “You are amongst those given respite. 

@) Until the day of the known time which is fixed for your destruction”. 

@> Iblis said: “I swear by Your power and domination that I shall misguide all of the children of Adam. 

@ Except whom You protect from my misguiding and You have chosen to worship You alone”. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Pride prevents a person from following the truth. 

2. To make analogies and deduce in the presence of a clear text is a baseless method. 

3. The disbelief of Iblis is out of stubbornness. 

4. The satan has no power over those from the creation whom Allah has chosen for His worship. 


















(Sfj} Allah said: “The truth is from Me and the truth 
is what I say. I do not say anything besides it. 

((f|S) On the Day of Judgment, I shall fill hell with 
you and your children, O Iblis, and those from the 
children of Adam who follow you in your disbelief, 
all of you”. 

(dp Say - O Messenger, to these idolaters: “I do not 
ask you for any reward for the advice I convey to 
you, and I am not of the pretentious by bringing 
more than what I have been ordered with. 

<dp The Qur’an is only a reminder to those who are 
accountable amongst men and jinns. 

(dp And you will come to know the news of this 
Qur’an and that it is true, after a short time when 
you die”. 










1 ^ ^ < 3 * ($) 



/o {^j ly* oi($) 


The Crowds (Surah Al-Zumar) 


^ ^ 4>i\ (3^^ *- — ^ 

-Xj-rL ,‘ji\ ljA\ Q ”)\j> 

x*$\. wji 3&\ii. 


Al-Zumar 


458 


Part 23 


® Themes of the Surah: 

It focuses on calling towards oneness of Allah and 
sincerity, rejecting idolatry and the outcome 
everyone in the Afterlife. 

® Explanation: 

(Jp The revelation of the Qur’an is from Allah, the 
Mighty whom nobody can overpower, the Wise in 
His creating, planning and legislating. It is not re¬ 
vealed from anyone besides Him. 

(Jp O Messenger, I revealed the Qur’an to you 
which comprises the truth, so all of its news are 
true and all of its rulings are just. So worship Allah, 
declaring Him to be One, directing all of your acts 
of worship to only Him. 

@ Definitely, for Allah is the religion pure of im¬ 
purities. And those who have taken friends besides Allah, such as idols which they worship besides Allah, presenting an 
excuse for worshipping them by saying: “We do not worship these except so that they bring us closer to Allah in status, 
present our needs to Him and intercede on our behalf with Him”. Allah will decide between the monotheist believers and 
the disbelievers who associate partners with Allah on the day of judgment regarding the oneness of Allah they used to 
differ in. Allah does not place guidance in the hearts of those who lie against Allah by attributing an associate with Him 
and who denies Allah’s favours upon him. 

If Allah wanted to take a son, as the idolaters claim, and Allah is far above from what they say - He would have chosen 
whom He wants from His creation and taken him as a child. Pure and exalted is He from what these idolaters say. He is 
One in His essence, attributes and actions, having no partner in them, Subduer of all His creation. 

@ He created the heavens and He created the earth with complete wisdom, not in vain as the unjust say. He enters the 
night into the day and the day into the night, so when one of them comes the other disappears. And He has made the sun 
and the moon subservient, each one orbits to a fixed time, which is the end of this life. Definitely, He is the Mighty who 
takes retribution from His enemies and nobody can overpower Him, Forgiving of the sins of His servants who repent. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The caller to Allah expects reward from Him. He does not seek reward from people for the truth he is calling them 
towards. 

2. Pretentiousness is not part of the religion. 

3. Faith, good deeds, Allah’s names and attributes are the only means a person may use to draw closer to Allah. 






























^j^L) 4J^V^====tVi C-Aj oiliii? (3 o^liL>- 


^ ^ ^ ^ l ^ \r :?> -' , \f"t'*/?f&* placenta. He who creates all of that is Allah you 

Ogi^-^—^u 2 dW-J' Bj* Lord. To Him alone belongs the kingdom. There i 

$ ^ \ \ ' ' T ^ £ < Cftfe no true Allah besides Him, so how do you turn fron 

a /sSj \ Oi X ASJ\ * d'"’a u\ ■?> tt- . • . i • .1 i . .i 



Cp O people, your Lord created you from one soul 
which is Adam, then He created from Adam his 
wife Eve. And He created for you eight kinds of an¬ 
imal for your benefit; from camels, cows, sheep and 
goats, from each type the male and the female. He 
creates you in the wombs of your mothers, stage af¬ 
ter stage, in the darkness of the stomach, womb and 
placenta. He who creates all of that is Allah your 

is 

from 

His worship to worshipping those who create noth¬ 
ing but are created? 

@ O people, if you disbelieve in your Lord, then 
Allah is Self-Sufficient and in no need of your 
faith. Your disbelief does not harm Him. The harm 
of your disbelief only returns back to you. And He 
is not pleased for His servants to disbelieve in Him 
nor does He order them to disbelieve, because Al¬ 
lah does not order indecency and wrong. And if you 
thank Allah for His favours and believe in Him, He 
will be pleased with your gratitude and reward you 
for it. And no soul will carry the sin of another soul, 
but every soul will be held back by its own deeds. 
Then to your Lord alone is your return on the Day 
of Judgment, then He will inform you of what you 
used to do in the world and reward you for your 
actions. He is Knowing of what is in the hearts of 
His servants; nothing of what is in them is hidden 
from Him. 

And when the disbeliever is afflicted by difficul¬ 
ty, such as illness, loss of wealth or fear of drown¬ 
ing, he calls upon his Lord to remove the difficulty 
which is upon him, turning to Him alone. Then when he grants him a favour by removing the difficulty which afflicted 
him, he leaves whom he used to beseech before, which is Allah, and he makes for Allah associates which he worships 
besides Him. O Messenger, say to one whose condition this is: “Enjoy your disbelief for as long as you live, which is 
a short time, as you are amongst the people of the fire who will be inseparable from it on the Day of Judgment, like a 
companion is inseparable from his companion”. 

{J} Is one who is obedient to Allah, spending the time at night in prostration to his Lord and standing for Him, fearing the 
punishment of the Afterlife and hoping in the mercy of his Lord better or that disbeliever who worships Allah in hardship 
but disbelieves in Him in ease and ascribes parters with Him? O Messenger, say: “Are those who know what Allah has 
made obligatory upon them due to their understanding of Allah and those who do not know any of this equal?” Only 
people of sound intelligence recognise the difference between the two. 




j (£) 4 \ jy>t jSj 


Al-Zumar 


(@) O Messenger, say to my servants who have faith in Me and My messengers: “Be mindful of your Lord by carrying out 
His commands and refraining from His prohibitions. For those amongst you who did good actions in the world is good in 
this world through divine assistance, health and provision, and in the Afterlife through Paradise. And the land of Allah is 
vast, so migrate therein until you find a place in which you can worship Allah without anything stopping you. The patient 
will be given their reward on the day of judgment without any counting or limit, due to its abundance and different types”. 
® Beneficial Points: 

1. Allah looks after the human in the mother’s womb. 

2. Allah is Self Sufficient, no one can benefit Him, and He is pleased with those who are grateful to Him. 

3. The disbeliever recognising Allah in hardship and abandoning Him in ease is proof of his state of disorder and confu¬ 
sion. 

4. Fear and hope are qualities of the people of faith. 

5. A sinful disbeliever and an obedient believer are not the same. 


















tVj 




0 ^ oij^ 

'^J± i4^^($)c^i->^ 1^2^ Jup\ 4jit JS(^) J 


@ Say, O Messenger: Allah has instructed me to 
worship Him alone, dedicating my worship to Him. 

He has instructed me with this and He also instruct¬ 
ed those who follow me. 

{jp He has instructed me to be the first of those who 
surrender and submit to Him from this nation. 

@ Say, O Messenger: I fear, if I go against Allah 
and do not follow him, the punishment of a great 
day, which is the day of resurrection. 

@ Say, O Messenger: I worship Allah alone dedi¬ 
cating my worship to Him. I do not worship others 
with Him. 

fjP So you, O idolaters, worship whatever idols you 
wish besides Him (this instruction is a threat). Say, 

O Messenger:.the true losers are those who will 
lose themselves and their family members, whom 
they will not meet in the Hereafter due to them be¬ 
ing separated in Paradise and the fire together with 
them. Thus they will never meet. That is indeed, 
and undoubtedly the obvious loss. 

@ They will have the fire, extreme heat and smoke 
from above and beneath them there will be smoke, 
flames and heat. That punishment is what Allah 
warns His servants of. O My servants, so fear Me 
by fulfilling My instructions and avoiding My pro¬ 
hibitions. 

After Allah mentioned the criminals He mentioned 
the states of His righteous servants in the following 
verse: 

Those who avoid the worship of idols, and any¬ 
thing else that is worshipped besides Allah, and re¬ 
turn to Allah in repentance, they will have the good 
news of Paradise when they pass away, in the grave 
and on the day of resurrection. So give good news, O Messenger, to My servants. 

(S§p Those who listen to what is said, distinguish between good and evil, and follow the best speech because of the benefit 
it contains. Those who possess these attributes are the ones whom Allah has given guidance and they are the ones who 
have sound intellect. 

{g} Those for whom the word of punishment is binding due to their persistence in their disbelief and deviation, you, O 
Messenger, have no means to guide them. Are you, O Messenger, able to rescue such people from the Fire? 

But those who are mindful of their Lord, by fulfilling His instructions and avoiding His prohibitions, they will have 
lofty dwellings, one above the other, underneath which rivers flow. Allah has made a firm promise of this to them and 
Allah does not break His promise. He is far above that. 

@ You are well aware, by having seen, that Allah sent down rain water from the sky, entered it into the earth and then 
brought it out as springs and rivers. Then with this water He produces crops of various colours. Then these crops become 
dry and you - who are witnessing this - see them turning yellow after having been green. Then, after they become dry, 
He makes them into fragmented pieces. In what has been mentioned there is a reminder for those who have hearts that 
are alive. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Dedicating worship to Allah is a condition for its acceptance. 

2. Sins necessitate Allah’s punishment and anger. 

3. Guidance to faith is in Allah’s hands, not in the hands of the Messenger (peace be upon him). 


















j vjJlS \ g 


1 


SQ* *i**j CAjy { yS\ 

A'S'i AAAA Ar^^- 

AX5j*JlIfi3 (©JL* [jAi^SA ^-Ao43j^ 4$ 

AvJ*j ]Ljm ^ 2 . A-* A J*4hj iyAAyA 

0*jt£& ^L=>'^\ 

\A lA^ 0 iA* Cj^-A U>3 4jA AAi 

Jj ’Sv jL^oli ^ILaXLS £y* t‘ ^r* A( &) 

^^43 S ^ \^S <$> o i&Ztf 

i \l lA^rV? L^A=Aio \ ^ 'A====>\ g^v>^' 

^/^-VS\ij;3 \3i/b 

a^xi>o S\ju AjA (^) lAA> J 'yfc 

VaA—^ j 

AAy <£%{$) ^JAaAAAA=A A 

j&L^ 





?oJ^ 


© Then is the person whose heart Allah has opened 
to Islam and he is guided to it with insight from his 
Lord, like the one whose heart is hardened against 
Allah’s remembrance? They can never be equal. 
Salvation is for those who are guided and loss is for 
those whose hearts are hardened against Allah’s re¬ 
membrance. Such people are in clear misguidance 
from the truth. 

© Allah sent down to His Messenger, Muhammad 
(peace be upon him), the Qur’an which is the best 
speech. He sent it down in a manner that part of it 
resembles other parts in their truthfulness, beauty 
and consistency without disagreement. It contains 
numerous stories and rulings, promises and threats, 
attributes of the people of truth, attributes of the 
people of falsehood etc. The skins of those who are 
in awe of their Lord tremble when they hear the 
threats and warnings it contains. Then their skins 
and their hearts soften to Allah’s remembrance 
when they hear the hope and good news it contains. 
What has been mentioned, about the Qur’an and 
its effect, is Allah’s guidance by which He guides 
whoever He wills. Those whom Allah leaves astray 
and does not guide, have no one to guide them. 
© Is the person whom Allah guided, blessed in the 
world and entered him into Paradise in the Hereaf¬ 
ter equal to the person who disbelieved and died as 
a disbeliever, and as a result was entered into the 
Fire with his hands and feet tied, unable to protect 
himself against the Fire except by his face that he 
falls on?! Those who wronged themselves by disbe¬ 
lief and sins will be told by way of reproach: Taste 
the disbelief and sins that you used to earn, for this 


is your recompense. 

© The nations that were before these idolaters also denied, and thus the punishment came to them suddenly from where 
they did not perceive so as to prepare for it by repentance. 

© By this punishment Allah made them taste humiliation, disgrace and shame in the worldly life. The punishment of the 
Hereafter that awaits them is worse and more severe if they only knew. 

© In this Qur’an revealed to Muhammad (peace be upon him) I have given people various examples of good and evil, 
truth and falsehood, faith and disbelief etc. in the hope that they will take a lesson from these examples and act on the 
truth leaving out falsehood. 

© I made it a Qur’an in the Arabic language, without any defect, deviation or confusion, in the hope that they will be¬ 
come mindful of Allah, by following His instructions and avoiding His prohibitions. 

© Allah gave the example of an idolater and a monotheist as that of a man owned by disputing partners - if he pleases 
some he angers others and he is thus confused and disturbed; and of a man who is devoted to one man alone who owns 
him and whose intentions he knows - he is thus comfortable and calm. These two men are not the same. Praise be to Allah, 
but most of them do not know and therefore they ascribe others as partners to Allah. 

© You, O Messenger, will certainly pass away and they will too. 

© Then you, O people, on the Day of Resurrection will dispute amongst yourselves before your Lord, over that which 
you disagree with one another, and it will become clear who is right and who is wrong. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The person who is on guidance from His Lord is not equal to the person whose heart is hard and who is in clear error. 

2. The noble Qur’an is the best speech because it is Allah’s speech and it is true in everything that it contains. 3. The 
people of faith and Allah-consciousness are the ones who submit to listening to the Qur’an. The people of sin and betrayal 
are the ones who do not benefit from it. 4. Denial of what the messengers brought is cause for the punishment’s coming 
down either in the world, the Hereafter or in both. 5. The Qur’an did not leave out any matter pertaining to this world or 
the Hereafter, but it explained it either in brief or in detail and gave examples for it. 


















* pit] 

i£$j 0 (j L r$: i b iL-, *1 

(^)> 


zAj i3-^^>_j t3_x_^i Vj "S-V^s— 
A»\'Jtl 


{*>*■' 

l3'6C_? £tto\ ( _j^\(^) J aLtt^W\^=gj 4 j3^ ( -^®-\j 

iuit Jk -44 Crt 3 aIS 

Cx5 j^i L3 4ji\ A_4d d/_J (J^) A^ O* j^i Li 
(j^- 6 2 >- 4 ^ L 3 (^aLLL ^5 4 _>i>% <_r 4 ^ 
o^i-3l5>i3 «r^\ ,js^ui\ l _ps3 v J \j o^.tt- .i 3 \ 

= 0 ^ £>y$ OjS 


C*1a 




@ There is no one more wrong than the person 
who attributes to Allah what is not appropriate for 
Him, such as a partner, spouse or child, and who de¬ 
nies the Qur’an. There is no one more wrong than 
the person who rejects the truth that the Messenger 
of Allah (peace be upon him) brought. Is there not 
in the Fire an abode and home for those who reject 
Allah and what His Messenger brought? Indeed, 
there is an abode and home for them there. 

After Allah mentioned the lying denier He men¬ 
tioned the truthful believer in the following verse: 

@ The prophets and those who brought truth in 
speech and action, and those who had faith in it, 
acting according to it, they are the ones who are tru¬ 
ly Allah fearing, who fulfil the instruction of their 
Lord and avoid His prohibition. 

(jp They will have all the everlasting pleasures they 
wish for by their Lord. That is the reward of those 
who do good deeds sincerely for their Creator and 
they spread good amongst His servants. 

So that Allah erases from them the worst sins 
that they used to do in the world, as they had re¬ 
pented from them and had turned towards their 
Lord, and rewards them according to the best deeds 
that they used to do. 

Is Allah not sufficient for His servant, Mu¬ 
hammad (peace be upon him), in his religious and 
worldly matters and to ward off his enemy? Indeed, 

He is sufficient. They frighten you, O Messenger, 
because of their ignorance and foolishness, with the 
idols that they worship besides Allah, that they will 
harm you. Those whom Allah abandons and does 
not bless with guidance, will have no one to guide 
them. 

(jp Whoever Allah blesses with guidance, there will be no one able to mislead them. Is Allah not Mighty, whom no one 
can challenge, and One who takes retribution from those who reject and go against Him? Indeed, He is Mighty and one 
who takes retribution. 

(jp O Messenger! If you ask these idolaters, “Who created the heavens and who created the earth?” they will say, “Allah 
created them.” Say to them, to show them the inability of their Allahs: Tell me about these idols that you worship besides 
Allah. If Allah willed to harm me, do they have the power to remove that harm from me? Or if my Lord wished to grant 
me mercy from Him, are they able to stop His mercy from me? Say to them: Allah alone is enough for me. It is on Him 
that I rely in all my affairs, it is on Him alone those who want to place their reliance entrust their affairs to. 

(jp Say, O Messenger: O my people, continue to act in that state of ascribing partners to Allah that you have chosen, and 
I will continue to act on what my Lord has instructed me, by calling towards His Oneness and by devoting my worship 
to Him. Soon you will come to know the outcome of each path. 

(Sjp Soon you will come to know who will be punished in this world in a way that disgraces and humiliates them, and upon 
whom an everlasting permanent punishment will come in the Hereafter. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Affirmation of Allah’s protection for His messenger (peace be upon him) from being harmed by his enemies. 

2. Affirming Allah’s oneness in lordship only, without affirming His oneness in divinity, will not save a person from the 
punishment of the fire. 
























g& 










@ I sent down to you, O Messenger, the Qur’an for 
people with the truth for you to warn them. Whoev¬ 
er follows guidance then the benefit of his guidance 
is only for his own self. Allah does not benefit from 
his guidance as He is in no need of it. Whoever 
strays then the harm of his straying is to his own 
detriment. Allah is not harmed by his straying. You 
are not in charge of them so as to force guidance on 
them. Your duty is only to convey to them what you 
have been instructed to convey. 

@ Allah is the one who takes away the souls when 
their term ends. He also takes the souls whose term 
has not ended when they sleep. He then withholds 
those for whom He has decreed death and releases 
those for whom He has not decreed death until a 
time that is fixed in His knowledge, (may He be 
glorified). In this taking away, release, giving of 
death and life there are indications for a people who 
reflect on the fact that the one who does this is able 
to resurrect people after their death for reckoning 
and recompense. 

The idolaters took their idols as intercessors, 
having hope of benefit in them instead of Allah. 
Say to them, O Messenger: Do you take them as 
intercessors even though they have no power to do 
anything for you or for themselves and they do not 
have understanding? They are lifeless objects that 
cannot speak, hear, see, benefit or harm. 

@1 Say - O Messenger, to these idolaters: All inter¬ 
cession belongs to Allah alone. No one can inter¬ 
cede before Him except with His permission and 
the intercession can only be for those whom He 
approves. The control of the heavens and the con¬ 
trol of the earth belongs to Him alone. Then to Him alone you will return on the Day of Resurrection for reckoning and 
recompense, and He will give you the requital of your actions. 

Whenever Allah is mentioned on His own, the hearts of the idolaters 
who do not believe in the Hereafter and the resurrection, reckoning and recompense that will take place therein, become 
averse. But when the idols that they worship other than Allah are mentioned they become happy and joyful. 

Say, O Messenger: O Allah, Creator of the heavens and the earth without any precedent, Knower of what is absent 
and what is present! Nothing of that is hidden from You. You alone will decide between Your servants on the Day of 
Resurrection about what they used to differ in the world, and it will become clear who is right and who is wrong and who 
is fortunate and who is not. 

@ If those who wronged themselves, by worshipping other than Allah and committing sins, could have all of the wealth 
and treasures on this earth to ransom themselves from the severe punishment on the day of resurrection, they would do 
so. However even if they did, the ransom would not be accepted from them. Rather they will face from Allah various 
types of torment they never used to expect 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Sleeping and waking up are two regular warnings reminding us of death and the resurrection. 

2. When Allah alone is mentioned to the disbelievers they are afflicted by anguish and sorrow, because they are reminded 
of what He had instructed what He had prohibited and they turn away from all of this. 

3. A disbeliever will try to ransom himself on the Day of Resurrection with everything he owns despite his miserliness 
with it in the world, but it will not be accepted from him. 


j \^\^====3y^ 

Al-Zumar 


Part 24 



















tM 




(@) The evils of the idolatry and sins that they com¬ 
mitted will appear to them and the punishment 
that they were warned of in the world, which they 
mocked at, will surround them. 

@ When a disbelieving man is afflicted by sick¬ 
ness, poverty etc. he calls out to Me to remove his 
affliction. Then when I bless him with health or 
wealth, the disbeliever says: Allah has only given 
me this because He knows that I deserve it. Actu¬ 
ally it is a test and a means of luring him to his 
destruction. But most disbelievers do not know this 
and they are deceived by the blessings Allah gives 
them. 

This statement was made by the disbelievers 
before them, but the wealth and status they earned 
was of no use to them at all. 

^ The recompense for the evils of idolatry and sins 
that they committed caught up with them. Those 
who wronged themselves by idolatry and sins, from 
these who are present, will also be caught up by the 
recompense for the evils of what they committed 
just like those in the past. They will not escape from 
Allah nor defeat Him. 

^ Do these idolaters say this and not know that 
Allah expands the provision for whoever He wills 
as a test for him: Is he grateful or ungrateful? And 
he narrows it for whoever he wills as a test for 
him: Is he patient or does he become angry with 
Allah’s decree. In what has been mentioned, about 
the expansion and narrowing of provision, there are 
indications of Allah’s planning for a people who be¬ 
lieve, because they are the ones who benefit from 
such indications. The disbelievers on the other hand 
pass by them without paying any attention to them. 

(§|5 Say - O Messenger, to My servants who have gone beyond the limit against themselves by ascribing partners to Allah 
and committing sins: Do not lose hope of Allah’s mercy and of His forgiveness for your sins. Allah forgives all the sins 
of those who repent to Him. He is the Forgiving towards the sins of those who repent and the Merciful towards them. 

(jp Return to your Lord by repentance and righteous actions and submit to Him, before the punishment comes to you on 
the day of resurrection. Then you will not find anyone from your idols and families to help you by rescuing you from the 
punishment. 

@ Follow the Qur’an, which is the best of what your Lord has revealed to His Messenger. Act on its instructions and 
avoid its prohibitions, before the punishment comes to you suddenly while you are unaware of it so as to prepare for it 
by repentance. 

(jj) Act now to avoid the soul’s extreme regret when it will declare on the day of resurrection: Alas my grief over my 
negligence in my duty to Allah by the disbelief and sins committed, and the mocking of the people of faith and obedience 
in the world. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The disbeliever calls on Allah in times of distress but forgets Him in times of prosperity. 

2. For the disbelievers, blessings are means of gradually luring them into further destruction. 

3. Allah’s mercy is vast for His creation. 

4. Regret that is of benefit is that which is in the world and which is followed by sincere repentance. 


i===\ja 

Ai \ ^ \ \ i jS (^) 

-VJbj 

C)\ y£s c&j^==^ l3 


Al-Zumar 


Part 24 


















JyL3j\ {^) (^-Ub 4j^\ ojj lV^j' 

L>5 O j)^~ (j£/^ (ify>: 

| ^ \ ^ 3 k^ {^) Cri 

^ oSj^. J^^j>r3 4J^ 

l£^~ljq) 

CJ^J {J^)^)j ^jf>-^ X^\jL*f& (^ 

A f^) ^'"0 J~t“^A\^±}}\ 4ji\ cUJ^j \jjj^=> 


«JiK) 


.dir- 


3*1 05 dJ^ AA^ 


@ Or it will attempt to justify itself through the 
argument of fate and say: If Allah had guided me I 
would have been one of those who are mindful of 
him, by fulfilling His instructions and avoiding His 
prohibitions. 

{j§5 Or it will say when it will see the punishment, 
wishing: If only I could return to the world and 
repent to Allah, and be one of those who do good 
deeds. 

@ The reality is different to what you are now as¬ 
serting by wishing for guidance. My signs came to 
you and you denied them, being arrogant. You were 
of those who rejected, disbelieving in Allah, His 
signs and His messengers. 

@ On the day of resurrection, you will see those 
who told lies about Allah, by attributing a partner 
and son to Him, their faces blackened, as a sign of 
their wretchedness. Is there not a place in Hell for 
those who are too proud to have faith in Allah and 
His messengers? Indeed, there is a place for them 
in it. 

@ Allah will save those who were mindful of their 
Lord, by fulfilling His instructions and avoiding 
His prohibitions, from the punishment by entering 
them into their place of success, which is Paradise. 
The punishment will not touch them nor will they 
grieve over the worldly pleasures they missed. 

@ Allah is the creator of everything. There is no 
creator besides Him. He has charge over everything, 
He plans its affair and disposes of it as He wills. 

@ To Him alone belong the keys of the treasures of 
goodness in the heavens and the earth. He grants it 
to whoever He wills and withholds it from whoever 
He wills. Those who reject Allah’s signs they are the losers; as they are deprived of faith in the worldly life and they will 
enter the fire to live there forever in the Hereafter. 

@ O Messenger! Say to these idolaters who entice you to worship their idols: Do you instruct me, O you who are ig¬ 
norant of your Lord, to worship other than Allah?! None deserves to be worshipped except Allah alone, so I will never 
worship other than Him. 

{§§) Allah had revealed to you, O Messenger, and to the messengers before you: If you worship others together with Allah 
the reward of your good deeds will be void and you will be of the losers in the world due to the loss of your religion and 
in the Hereafter due to the punishment. 

(jjj) Rather, worship Allah alone and do not ascribe a partner to Him. Be of those who are grateful to Him for the favours 
that He has given you. 

(jjj) The idolaters did not show reverence to Allah as He deserves to be revered when they ascribed others of His weak and 
feeble creation as partners to Him. They were heedless of Allah’s power, one of the manifestations of which is that the 
earth together with the mountains, trees, rivers, and oceans in it will be in His grasp on the day of resurrection, and that the 
seven heavens will be folded up in His right hand. He is transcendent, pure and above what the idolaters say and believe. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Pride is a despicable and ominous quality that prevents a person from arriving at the truth. 

2. The blackening of faces on the Day of Resurrection is a sign of the wretchedness of such people. 

3. Ascribing partners to Allah destroys all righteous actions. 

4. Allah, may He be glorified, on the Day of Judgement, will grasp the heavens and the earth with His right hand, in a 
manner which befits His Majesty. 



oi 0^=^ aSa ||p 




















J jptyvjr* 


A 2 T 



^jJ^SQ.4^ iO^ ^?4y 4>Sz& cy4 i 
h5°W dJz^==^ \ ^P^^o : €3 v ^ ^ | 


L&^iLSr\3\_. 


i% 5 %fe 



j^CaJi *LS^ jj==0JJ .A_3j ^JJ eU^Vi J£3 Ac-0j\BJ 

o^l^3\J-50 



jgS On the day when the angel appointed to blow 
the trumpet will blow it, everyone in the heavens 
and the earth will die. Then the angel will blow it 
a second time for the resurrection, and they will all 
stand up alive, looking on to see what Allah will 
do to them. 

@ The earth will light up when the Lord of Might 
will appear to decide between the servants. The 
records of deeds of people will be laid open, the 
prophets will be brought, and the guardian angels 
who were witness to the actions of people will be 
brought. Allah will decide between all of them with 
justice and they will not be wronged on that day. No 
person’s evil deeds will be increased, or his good 
deeds decreased. 

@ Allah will give each soul its recompense in full, 
whether its actions were good or evil. Allah knows 
best what they do. Nothing of their actions, whether 
good or bad, is hidden from Him and He will give 
them the recompense of their actions on this day. 

@ The angels will drive those who rejected Allah 
to the fire in large crowds. When they will come to 
Hell, the angels appointed as its keepers will open 
its doors and receive them with reproach by saying 
to them: Did not messengers from your kind come 
to you reciting to you the signs of your Lord that 
were revealed to them, and warning you of meet¬ 
ing the Day of Resurrection because of the severe 
punishment therein? The disbelievers will say in 
confession: Indeed, that took place, but the word of 
punishment is binding on the disbelievers and we 
were disbelievers. 

(Sj) It will be said to them, to further humiliate them 
and so they may lose all hope in Allah’s mercy and ever coming out of the fire: Enter the doors of fire to remain therein 
forever. How terrible and bad is the place of those who were proud and arrogant against the truth. 

The angels will gently lead those who were mindful of their Lord, by fulfilling His instructions and avoiding His pro¬ 
hibitions, to Paradise in large crowds honoured. When they will come to Paradise its doors will be opened for them and 
the angels appointed to it will say to them: Peace be on you from every difficulty and from everything you dislike. Your 
hearts and your actions were pure, so enter Paradise to remain there forever. 

The believers will say when they enter Paradise: Praise be to Allah who was true to the promise that He made to us on 
the tongues of His messengers. He had promised to enter us into Paradise. He has given us the land of Paradise, in which 
we can live wherever we want to. How excellent is the reward of those who worked by doing righteous actions seeking 
the pleasure of their Lord! 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Evidence for the two blows of the trumpet. 

2. Explanation of the humiliation that the disbelievers will encounter and the honour that the believers will receive. 

3. Evidence of the disbelievers’ living forever in Hell and the believers’ living forever in bliss. 

4. Good actions bring about good reward. 


'C. ^ ^ J 

j \. | 



















J&VL 


tnv 








($)US-2^ jJy i^^iHr^. (S^j ^4jj 


oi' 


4>L- 


0 


l>&ht4roi$& 


cUaAj ^Lk Joo 

o 5 


@ The angels on that witnessed day will surround 
the throne, declaring Allah’s transcendence over 
what is not appropriate for Him as the disbelievers 
say. Allah will pass judgement between all creation 
with justice and will honour those whom He hon¬ 
ours and punish those whom He punishes. It will 
be said: Praise be to Allah, the Lord of all created 
things for the judgement that He passed of mercy 
for His believing servants and punishment for His 
disbelieving servants. 

Surah Ghafir (The Forgiver) 

® Themes of the Surah: 

This surah focuses on addressing those who dispute 
with respect to Allah’s signs by addressing them di¬ 
rectly and calling them to turn to the truth. 

® Explanation: 

iJS) Ha MTm. The discussion on similar letters has 
already passed in Surah Al-Baqarah. 
jj!) The revelation of the Qur’an sent down to His 
Messenger, Muhammad (peace be upon him), is 
from Allah, the Mighty whom none can overpower, 
the Knower of the interests of His servants. 

@ Forgiver of the sins of the sinful, Accepter of 
the repentance of those of His servants who turn 
to Him, Severe in retribution against those who do 
not repent from their sins, One of bounty and grace. 
There is no being deserving of worship besides 
Him. To Him alone is the return of the servants on 
the Day of Resurrection and He will give them the 
recompense they deserve. 

(0) No one disputes about Allah’s signs that indicate 
to His Oneness and the truthfulness of His messengers except those who reject Allah due to their deficient intellects. Do 
not grieve over them and do not let the abundant provision and favours that they enjoy deceive you. Their being given 
respite is a means of gradually luring them into their own destruction. 

© Before them, the people of Noah denied, as did the confederates after Noah, including 4 Ad, Thamud, the people of 
Lot, the people of Madyan all denied. Pharaoh also denied. Every nation plotted against their Messenger, to capture and 
kill him. They argued with the falsehood that they had, to remove the truth with it. But I seized all those nations. So reflect 
over how my retribution against them was! It was a severe retribution. 

@ Like how Allah decided to destroy those denying nations, the Word of your Lord, O Messenger, is binding against the 
disbelievers, that they will be the inmates of the Fire. 

© The angels who carry the throne of your Lord, O Messenger, and those who are around it, declare the transcendence 
of their Lord from that which is not proper for Him, they believe in him, and seek forgiveness for those who have faith 
in Allah, saying in their supplication: Our Lord, Your knowledge and mercy encompass everything, so forgive those who 
repent from their sins and follow Your religion and protect them from being touched by the fire. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Combining encouragement towards Allah’s mercy and caution against the severity of His retribution, is a praiseworthy 
method of calling others to do good. 

2. Seizing those communities who denied is a divine practice. 

3. The angels declare the transcendence of their Lord. 

4. Praising Allah is one of the etiquettes of supplication. 

5. Praying for a Muslim in his absence benefits the person praying as well as the person being prayed for. 








Ghafir 


467 


Part 24 




























\ cJ }\j J^^j>\^ If* 





@ The angels will say: “Our Lord, enter the be¬ 
lievers into gardens of eternity which You promised 
You will enter them into, and enter those whose 
actions are good amongst their fathers, wives and 
children. It is you who are the Mighty with nobody 
to overpower You, Wise in your decreeing and 
planning. 

(J5 And save them from their bad actions, so do 
not punish them as a result. Whomever You pro¬ 
tect from punishment for his bad actions, then You 
have had mercy on him. This mercy by entry into 
Paradise is the great success which no success can 
compare with”. 

Those who disbelieved in Allah and His mes¬ 
sengers will be addressed on the day of judgment 
when they enter the fire, whilst they will hate and 
curse themselves: “Allah’s contempt for you when 
used to be called to believing in Allah, but you 
would disbelieve in Him, taking dieties besides 
Him, is greater than your own contempt for your¬ 
selves when being thrown into the fire.” 

@ The disbelievers will say, confessing their sins 
when their confession will not benefit: “Our Lord, 

You made us lifeless twice when we were non-ex¬ 
istent then You created us, then you gave us death 
after that creation, and You gave us life twice by 
creating us from non-existence and by restoring us 
for the resurrection. We have admitted our sins we 
earned, so is there any route we can take to exit 
from the fire, so we can return to life to correct our 
actions so You become pleased with us?” 

@ That punishment which you are punished with is 
because when Allah was called upon and no partner 
was associated with Him, you disbelieved in Him and made partners for Him. And when partners were worshipped along¬ 
side Allah, you believed. So the judgment is with Allah alone, High with His essence, decree and domination, the Great. 
@ Allah is the one who shows you signs in the horizons and your own selves, to prove to you His power and His oneness, 
and He sends down for you rainwater from the skies so it becomes a cause for the provision you are given, such as plants, 
crops and so forth. And nobody takes lessons from the signs of Allah except one who turns to Him, sincerely repenting. 

@ So call upon Allah, O believers, being sincere to Him in worship and supplication, without associating partners with 
Him, even though the disbelievers dislike that and it angers them. 

(jjj) So He is worthy of supplication and obedience being made sincere for Him, as He is elevated in ranks, separate from 
all of His creation. And He is the Lord of the Great Throne. He sends revelation upon whomever He wants from His 
servants, so that they become alive and make others alive, and so that they warn people of the day of judgment in which 
the first and last will meet one another. 

(jjj) The day in which they will be apparent having gathered on one plain. Nothing of theirs will be hidden from Allah, 
nothing of theirs will be hidden from Allah, everything from their own self, their actions, and their reward will be made 
apparent. He will ask: “For whom is the kingdom today?” There will be only be one answer at this time: the kingdom is 
for Allah, the One in His essence, qualities and actions, the Prevailing one who has dominated everything and for whom 
everything has submitted. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The place for repentance to be accepted is the worldly life. 

2. Those who repent often, turning to their Lord, benefit the most from the admonition. 

3. The steadfastness of the believer is not affected by the stance of the disbelievers who reject his religion. 

4. The tyrants and oppressors amongst the kings will humble themselves before Allah on the day of judgment. 


4 $ dJo Cj" ^ \j*j)_) 



















4lA*^ <L-$J0 3o)j {^) c^lll4^ ^' 

l5-^ 

o?p^ \ *ci^\£~jXjo (ft) ^U4 
Ol^J (3^Vc5^* 


jQ\i^0{$)jo* ^ 6l>4^ 5l^===UJ>4^1) 


c 

/* , 

Uu 


’-X-3— VS V? 4 jopjlT 

joA-iu 


@ Today, every soul will be rewarded for the ac¬ 
tion it earned: if it was good, then the reward will 
be good, and if it was bad, then it will be bad. There 
will be no injustice on this day, because the judge is 
Allah who is Just. Allah is swift in taking account 
of His servants, due to His knowledge encompass¬ 
ing them. 

@ O Messenger, warn them of the day of judg¬ 
ment. This day of judgment which has drawn near 
and is coming, and everything which is coming will 
soon arrive. When the hearts will rise, due to its in¬ 
tense horror, until they reach the throats, They will 
all be silent, with none of them speaking except 
whom the Merciful gives permission to. Those who 
wronged themselves through idolatry and sins will 
not have any friend, relative or an intercessor who 
will listen, even if he had the ability to intercede. 
@ He knows what the eyes of the lookers secretly 
glance at and He knows what the hearts conceal. 
None of that is hidden from Him. 

(jp Allah judges with justice, so He does not wrong 
anyone by decreasing His good actions or increas¬ 
ing His bad actions. And those whom the idolaters 
worship besides Allah cannot judge with anything, 
because they do not possess anything. Allah is 
Hearing of the sayings of His servants, Seeing their 
intentions and actions, and He shall reward them 
for that. 

@ Have these idolaters not travelled on earth, so 
that they can ponder how the outcome was of the 
nations before them who denied, as it was a bad 
end? Those nations were stronger than they are, and 
they left an impression on earth by buildings which 
these people have not left, but Allah destroyed them because of their sins, and they had nobody to protect them from the 
punishment of Allah. 

@ That punishment which befell them only befell them because their messengers used to come to them with clear proof 
and evident miracles, but they disbelieved in Allah and denied His messengers. Allah seized them, despite their strength, 
and destroyed them. He is Powerful, severe in punishing those who disbelieve in Him and deny His messengers. 

When the Prophet (peace be upon him) encountered the denial of his people, Allah mentioned the story of Moses with 
Pharaoh, to give him good news that the outcome of his matter will be divine help. He said: 

(Sj) I sent Moses with My clear signs and decisive proof. 

(jp To Pharaoh, his minister Haman, and Qarun, and so they said: “Moses is a magician and a liar in his claim to be a 
messenger”. 

{§| Then when Moses came to them with the proof to show his truthfulness, Pharaoh said: “Kill the sons of those who 
have believed in Moses and keep their women alive, to disgrace them”. And the plot of the disbelievers to attempt to 
reduce the number of believers will only perish not being successful. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The horrors of the day of judgment will be intense. 

2. Allah’s knowledge will encompass His servants’ actions, be they hidden or apparent. 

3. The plot of the disbelievers will perish, regardless of how intense it may be. 





























iS^J$^ cA^o J4> <j\j^J* J 'Ij 

»^ 

<5y)c_AI14“' 


@> Pharaoh said: “Leave me to kill Moses, as a 
punishment for him, and let him call upon his Lord 
to save him from me. I do not care if he calls upon 
His Lord. I fear he will change your religion which 
you follow or corruption will appear on earth by 
killing and destruction”. 

@ Moses (peace be upon him) said: “I have sought 
the protection of my Lord and your Lord against 
every person who is arrogant to accepting and hav¬ 
ing faith in the truth, not believing in the resurrec¬ 
tion, accounting and punishment. 

(jp) A believing man from the family of Pharoah, 
who was hiding his faith from his people said, crit¬ 
icising them for deciding to kill Moses: “Are you 
going to kill a man without any crime, besides 
him saying: ‘My Lord is Allah’, despite the fact he 
brought you miracles and proof to show the truth¬ 
fulness of his claim to be a messenger from his 
Lord? If he really is a liar, his lying will turn against 
him, but if he is truthful, some of the punishment he 
is promising will quickly befall you. Allah does not 
guide to the truth one who trespasses His limits and 
who lies against Allah and His messengers. 

(jp) O people, for you is the kingdom today, dom¬ 
inating in the land of Egypt. So who will save us 
from Allah’s punishment if it comes to us due to 
killing Moses?” Pharaoh said: “The opinion is my 
opinion and the judgment is my judgment. And 
1 have decided to kill Moses, to remove evil and 
corruption. I only guide you to what is right and 
correct.” 

And the one who brought faith said, advising his 
people: “I fear for you, if you kill Moses unjustly 
and oppressively, a punishment like the punishment of the groups that united against their prophets previously, then Allah 
destroyed them. 

(Sjj Like those who disbelieved and denied the messengers, such as the people of Noah, Aad, Thamud, and those who 
came after them. Allah destroyed them due to their disbelief and denial of their messengers. And Allah does not intend to 
oppress the servants. He only punishes them due to their sins. 

jj) O people, I fear for you the day of judgment. That day when people will call one another, calling their relatives or 
those of status, thinking that they can benefit them in this frightening place. 

<§} The day you will turn away, running out of fear from the fire. You will not have any protector to protect you from 
Allah’s punishment. Whomever Allah abandons and does not place faith in his heart then there no one who can guide him. 
Beneficial Points: 

1. Pharaoh’s heresy. 

2. The believer seeks refuge in his Lord to protect him from the plot of his enemies. 

3. The permissibility of hiding one’s faith due to a predominant interest or to ward off harm. 

4. Presenting advice to people is a quality of the believers. 


j&j ^ j o' 

^=4^3oi 

Sj’y ($1 \' 


Ghafir 


470 


Part 24 
















<4 \ J 4 5 cyt 

4 




•jljyj £.0 Ajo ^_y 


(jilaLiu_^Jo43i\ oij\«-£)OiV 0 0%^ 

•?■* ^ -< 




^ 4 Us>S? ijl 3 Csiy 
| O^”—Dj^J^.Oi) ^i%X^===$ 

3 -'f »- "'■ 

sXfci O^soJ3' 





jgS) Joseph came to you before Moses with clear 
proof for the oneness of Allah, but you remained 
in doubt and denial of what he brought, until when 
he died you increased in doubt and uncertainty, and 
you said: “Allah will never send a messenger af¬ 
ter him”. Just as you are misguided from the truth, 
Allah leads astray every person who trespasses the 
limits of Allah and doubts His oneness. 

@ Those who argue about the verses of Allah to 
refute them without any proof or evidence that has 
come to them, their argument is greatly hated in the 
eyes of Allah and in the eyes of those who brought 
faith in Allah and His messengers. Just as Allah 
sealed the hearts of these who argue about our vers¬ 
es to refute them, Allah seals the heart of every per¬ 
son who is arrogant to the truth and tyrannical, thus 
he does not find the path to what is right nor is he 
guided to good. 

Pharaoh said to his minister Hainan: “O Hainan, 
build for me a high building, in the hope I can reach 
the paths. 

@ In the hope I can reach the paths which lead to 
the skies, so I can see the Allah of Moses that he 
claims is the true Allah. And I believe Moses is ly¬ 
ing in what he claims”. And in this way, Pharoah’s 
bad deeds were adorned for him when he made his 
request to Haman, and he was turned from the true 
path to the path of misguidance.And the plot of 
Pharaoh to make the falsehood he believed dom¬ 
inant and to refute the truth Moses brought, is in 
complete loss. It will be a vain attempt, ending in 
failure and eternal wretchedness. 

The man who believed from the family of Phar- 
O people, follow me; I shall show you and guide you to 


aoh said, advising his people and guiding them to the true path: 
the correct path and guidance to the truth. 

(jjS) O people, this worldly life is only an enjoyment of temporary pleasures, so let it not deceive you with the short-lived 
enjoyment it contains. The abode of the Hereafter with the everlasting pleasure it contains is the abode of permanence and 
residence, so work for it by obeying Allah, and be wary of becoming preoccupied from acting for it due to your worldly 
life. 

@ Whoever does a bad action, he will never be rewarded except with the like of what he did, without punishment being 
added to it. And whoever does a good action seeking Allah’s pleasure through it, whether the doer is male or female, 
provided he is a believer in Allah and His messengers - will enter Paradise on the day of judgment. Allah will grant them 
provision, through what He has placed in it of fruits and the everlasting pleasure which will never end, without account. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Arguing to refute the truth and establish falsehood is a bad characteristic amongst the characteristics of the misguided. 

2. Pride prevents one from being guided to the truth. 

3. The truth will always remain and any plot of the disbeliever to change it will fail. 

4. The necessity of preparing for the Hereafter and not being preoccupied from it due to the world. 


















J&VL 






\ \ cJiS\ ^ 3^-0 * 

^ ^ 4. ,*« 

^Aj L^. ^j-^i La 4^ L 

t5\ ^j-ia.* ^ \_)j/y-^\ <3\ ^^==^£o\ IjVj^It 

H U* 5%^' jJj $ 'djpt^Sfo I 

4J^(jljJ?/ 0 ^ Cf^jp^J J^==^ (jj^ L= {^) 

ta ij5j^ (^ \j _^\-^> 4j^^jL>i 

^ 5\*$^ l^UL^ Jji5ijpJ^ %-AtPJ \jjJs>\^Xo 
_AJ\ jlj? ( vj ) \ *xJui\^.^jj £O 

3 $3£j^\j^^i^jjs^jt, jjts 


1 


@ O people, why is it that I call you towards salva¬ 
tion from loss in the worldly life and the Hereafter 
by bringing faith in Allah and good actions, but you 
call me to enter the fire by asking me to disbelieve 
in Allah and disobey Him? 

@ You are calling me to your falsehood in the hope 
that I disbelieve in Allah and worship alongside 
Him others, the truth of which I have no knowledge 
of, and I am calling you to have faith in Allah, the 
Mighty whom nobody can overpower, the Prevail¬ 
ing who has subdued everything. 

@ Truly, what you call me to have faith in and 
obey is not fit to be called to in this world or the 
Hereafter nor does it respond to whoever calls upon 
it. The return of us all is to Allah alone and those 
who transgress in disbelief and sins are the people 
of the fire who will enter it forever on the day of 
judgment. 

@ But they rejected his advice, and so he said: 

“You will remember the advice I gave you and you 
will regret not accepting it. And I entrust all my 
affairs over to Allah alone. Allah is Seeing of His 
servants; nothing of their actions is hidden from 
Him”. 

(Sj) So Allah protected him from their evil plot when 
they intended to kill him, and the punishment of 
drowning enveloped the followers of Pharaoh, as 
Allah destroyed him and all his armies in this world. 

(S§p And after their death they will be exposed to the 
fire at the beginning and end of the day, and on the 
day of judgment it will be said: “Enter the followers 
of Pharaoh into the most severe and greatest pun¬ 
ishment, due to the disbelief, denial and preventing others from Allah’s way.” 

@ O Messenger, remember when the followers and the leaders from the people of hell will argue, so the oppressed fol¬ 
lowers will say to the arrogant leaders: “We were your followers in misguidance in the world, so are you going to relieve 
us of some of Allah’s punishment by bearing it on our behalf?” 

|jS) The arrogant leaders will say: “We are in the fire, regardless of whether we were followers or leaders. None of us will 
bear a part of the punishment of the Hereafter. Allah has decided between the servants, so He has given everyone the 
punishment they deserve”. 

@ Those being punished in the fire from the followers and leaders will say to the keepers of hell, once they have lost 
hope in leaving the fire and returning to the worldly life to repent: “Call upon your Lord to lessen from us one day of this 
everlasting punishment”. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Faith is a means of salvation and disbelief is a means of destruction. 

2. The importance of reliance upon Allah. 

3. The salvation of the caller to Allah from the plots of his enemies. 

4. Punishment in the Transitory Stage is real. 

5. The disbelievers will latch on to any means which can relieve them from the fire, even for a limited time, but this will 
never happen. 























<j$b 

"y)\j>J* >ajp( ^ ) JvA^2^ 

VS$\s l3j 0J2\i^ isM 

>—^ {^) c_^L^====^ \ -k^3 ^ 

4j^\ A—P 9 ^ • j l._?^s^\3 ^ ^ - < 3^1 ^^■—-~ =s 3-3 



-JLx.^ 


^JiJ^ 


*os\ c. 


^ 6ij$) _>^==u^ |j 

_joLjl 4 ^ 

j !^ 0 

1 0 ^ £S&^. S^-3 ^ # | 

\j^Ci ^ (S^-^i^j I 


Ghafir 


473 


Part 24 


(jj) The keepers of hell will say in response to the 
disbelievers: “Did your messengers not come to 
you with clear proof and evidence?” The disbe¬ 
lievers will say: “Indeed, they used to come to us 
with clear proof and evidence”. The keepers will 
say to mock them: “You call, for we are not going 
to intercede for the disbelievers. But the call of the 
disbelievers is not but in error and waste, as it will 
not be accepted from them due to their disbelief’. 
After Allah mentioned the story of Pharaoh and 
the outcome of his and his followers’ affairs in this 
world and the Hereafter, He mentioned the matter 
of the Messenger and the believers, and the help 
they will gain in this life and the Hereafter, and so 
He said: 

(jp I will make My messengers and those who be¬ 
lieve in what they brought victorious in this world 
by making their proof manifest and by supporting 
them against their enemies. And I shall make them 
victorious on the day of judgement by entering 
them into Paradise and punishing their disputants 
in this world by entering them into the fire. This is 
after the people of truth from the prophets, angels 
bear witness regarding the message being conveyed 
and the denial of the disbelieving nations. 
j|§5 On the day when no excuse will benefit those 
who wronged themselves by disbelief and sin, and 
they will be distanced on that day from Allah’s 
mercy, and for them is the evil abode and painful 
punishment. 

(jp) And I granted Moses miracles and knowledge 
through which the Israelites would be guided to 
the truth, and I made the Torah an inherited book 


amongst the Children of Israel, each generation would pass on it on to the other. 

Ij)) As a guidance to the true path and a reminder to the people of sound intellect. 

O Messenger, be patient on the denial and harm by your people which you face. Allah’s promise of help and support 
to you is true without doubt. And seek forgiveness for your sin and glorify the praise of your Lord at the beginning and 
end of the day. 

@ Those who dispute the signs of Allah, striving to refute them without any evidence, do so only because of arrogance to 
it and a desire for dominance (in this world). They will never achieve their goal of dominance so hold firm, O Messenger, 
to Allah. It is He who is Hearing of the servants’ statements, Seeing their actions. None of it will escape Him and He will 
reward them for it. 

@) The creation of the heavens and the earth and their greatness and vastness are greater than the creation of mankind, 
so the one who made them despite their greatness has the power to bring the dead back to life from their graves, to take 
them to account and reward them. But most people do not know, so they do not consider it nor do they deem it a proof 
for the resurrection, despite it being so clear. 

{j§5 The one who cannot see and the one who can see are not equal, nor are those who have faith in Allah, accept His 
messengers and do good actions, equal to those who do wrong and have corrupt belief! You do not remember except a 
little, because if you had remembered you would have known the difference between the two groups so you could strive 
to be amongst those who have faith and did good deeds, seeking the pleasure of Allah. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Allah’s help for His messengers and the believers is an established divine practice. 

2. The excuse of the oppressor on the day of judgment will not benefit him. 

3. The importance of patience in facing falsehood. 

4. The creation of the heavens and the earth proving the resurrection, because He who created that which is great has the 
power to restore to life that which is smaller. 






















Jf&L 


tWt 


\ c^-aj g 


1^5 C^S^ aj5l§ aJp\ji]\(J^ 

I j^=^ c^c^ \ (3^3^^===u^3 J ($) 



@ The Hour in which Allah will raise the dead for 
reckoning and reward is definitely coming, without 
doubt, but most people do not believe it is coming. 

That is why they do not prepare for it through faith 
and good actions. 

@ O people, your Lord said: “Call upon Me alone 
and worship Me alone, and do not associate any 
partner with Me. Those who are too arrogant in 
worshipping Me alone will enter the fire on the Day 
of Judgment, low and disgraced”. 

(Jjp Allah is the One who has made the night dark 
for you, so you can find peace in it and rest, and He 
made the day bright and clear so that you can work 
in it. Allah is full of great grace to the people when 
He granted them His apparent and hidden bless¬ 
ings, but most people do not thank Him for what 
He has blessed them with. 

(jjS) That Allah who graciously gave you His favours 
is the Creator of everything, so there is no creator 
besides Him. There is no true Allah besides Him. 

So how do you turn away from His worship to¬ 
wards worshipping others who do not possess any 
benefit or harm? 

© Just as these people were turned away from ^ ^ y s ^ Ct i T 

faith in Allah and worshipping Him alone, those 4| 0^4^ 





^ *' W 

\\t < >z\ r\ j>. 

1. I 






who reject Allah’s signs which prove His oneness 
are turned away in every age and place. So they do 
not find their way to the truth nor are they divinely 
guided to it. 

(jp O people, Allah is the one who made the earth a 
suitable place for dwelling/living, and the sky firm¬ 
ly formed above you, prevented from collapsing. 

And He formed you in the wombs of your mothers, 
then made perfected your formsyour forms. And He granted you provision from lawful, pleasant foods. He who granted 
you these blessings is Allah your Lord. So blessed is Allah, Lord of all the creation. There is no Lord besides Him. 

^ He is the Living who will not die. There is no true Allah besides Him. So call upon him in worship and supplication, 
seeking His pleasure alone, and do not associate any of His creation as partners with Him. All praise is for Allah, Lord 
of the creation. 

dj§!) O Messenger, say: “Allah has forbidden me from worshipping those whom you worship besides Allah, these idols 
which do not benefit or harm, when the clear proof and evidence have come to me regarding the falsehood of worshipping 
them. And Allah has ordered me to submit to Him alone through worship, as He is the Lord of all the creation. There is 
no Lord besides Him. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Supplication is included in the meaning of worship which can only be directed towards Allah, as supplication is the 
essence of worship. 

2. The favours of Allah require gratitude from the servants. 

3. Allah is ever Living. 

4. The importance of sincerity in actions. 



















o 

> 




.^liVg^jS 1^|4^ 

y<^3 

11cl^ 2 ^ 

cikP^ ($) 4jt====^ oJy_j 

_ ^<> ^ 

\ i^) Oj^-*i l^j 

l|^ 

O %> 0 J 

\ <*L^>\ a 


(jp He is the one who created Adam from soil, then 
He created you after him from a sperm-drop, then 
after a sperm-drop from clotted blood, then after 
that He takes you out of your mothers’ wombs as 
small children, then so that you reach the peak of 
your strength, then so that you grow older until you 
become elders. And some of you die before that, 
and so that you reach a fixed time in the knowledge 
of Allah which you cannot decrease or increase, 
and so that you benefit from these proof and evi¬ 
dence for His power and oneness. 
ijjS) He alone is the one in whose hand is giving life 
and He alone is the one in whose hand is giving 
death. So when He decides a matter, He only says 
to that matter: “Be” and it becomes. 

@ O Messenger, do you not see those who argue 
about the signs of Allah, denying them despite them 
being clear, so you can wonder at their condition 
whilst they are turning away from the truth despite 
it being so clear? 

(Sjj) Those who denied the Qur’an and the truth I 
sent My messengers with - these deniers will soon 
learn the outcome of their denial and they shall see 
the bad ending. 

(SJ) They will learn its outcome when the shackles 
will be on their necks and the chains on their feet, 
with the angels of hell dragging them. 

@ They will drag them in hot boiling water, then 
they will be burnt in the fire. 

@ Then it will be said to them, to scold and rebuke 
them: “Where are your claimed Allahs you com¬ 
mitted idolatry by worshipping? 

(jp Besides Allah, from your idols who could not 
benefit or harm?” The disbelievers will say: “They have disappeared from us, so we cannot see them. In fact, we did not 
worship anything in the world which deserved to be worshipped”. In the way these people were led astray, Allah leads 
the disbelievers astray from the truth in every era and place. 

(J) It will be said to them: “That punishment which you are suffering is due to your rejoicing over the idolatry you were 
upon and due to your excess in rejoicing. 

(Sj) Enter the doors of hell, staying therein forever. Wretched is the abode in which those arrogant to the truth will reside”. 
After Allah’s Messenger (peace be upon him) suffered what he did from his people, Allah ordered him to be patient and 
consoled him through the help He promised him. 

{|p O Messenger, be patient on the harming and denial of your people. The promise of Allah to help you is true without 
doubt. So I will either show you in your lifetime some of the punishment I promise them, as occurred in the Battle of 
Badr, or I will make you die before that. To Me alone they will return on the Day of Judgment, reward them for their 
actions accordingly, entering them into the fire they will remain in forever. 

Beneficial Points: 

1. We can learn from Allah’s divine custom of creating progressively that we must also fulfill our projects gradually. 

2. How hideous it is to rejoice over evil 

3. The importance of patience in our daily life especially those who enjoin the good 


5 4^\ Ojl 

3 ^ (^°) C>jp>-y±3 


Ghafir 


Part 24 




















-A-O-sjO' 


tvn 





j j> 



@ O Messenger! I have sent many messengers 
before you to their people, but they rejected them 
and caused them harm. The messengers were pa¬ 
tient upon the rejection and harm they faced. From 
among these messengers are those whom I have 
related their stories to you, and those whose sto¬ 
ries I have not related. It is not correct for a mes¬ 
senger to bring a sign to his people from his Lord, 
except if He (may He be glorified) wishes for him 
to bring it. So, for the disbelievers to demand signs 
is wrong. When the decree of Allah for victory or 
judgement in favour of the messengers against their 
nations happens, the judgement will be made fair¬ 
ly. The disbelievers will then be destroyed and the 
messengers will be saved. At that point when the 
judgement is made between the servants, the people 
of falsehood will lose out by having put themselves 
in a position of doom by committing disbelief. 

(Sj| Allah is the one who created camels, cows and 
livestock for you so that you can ride on some of 
them and consume the meat of some. 

(Sjf|) You have many benefits in these creations as 
well as ships and other modes of transport which 
change over time. You can use them to acquire 
whatever necessities you desire to be fulfilled. And 
from the most apparent of these needs is transporta¬ 
tion across the land and sea. 

@ And Allah shows you many of His signs that 
point to His power and oneness; so which of His 
signs do you not acknowledge, after it has been es¬ 
tablished they are His signs? 

|J) Do these rejectors not travel the earth and pon¬ 
der over what the outcome was of the nations who 
rejected before them, and take heed from it? Those nations were wealthier, stronger and more influential than them in the 
world, but their actions and strength did not help them at all when the destructive punishment of Allah came. 

(|JS) When their messengers brought clear proofs and great miracles to them, they denied them and were happy with the 
knowledge they had that contradicted whatever their messengers came with. So the very punishment they would mock 
when warned of by their messengers, came upon them. 

(j§S) Then, when they saw My punishment they began confessing, at a time when no confession would benefit them, say¬ 
ing, “We bring faith upon Allah alone, and reject whatever partners and idols we would worship instead of Him.” 

So their bringing faith upon seeing the punishment descending upon them, did not benefit them. This is the way of 
Allah that has been consistent among His servants: that their bringing faith upon seeing the punishment is of no use. The 
disbelievers doomed themselves at the time when the punishment descended, by having put themselves in a place of 
destruction because of their disbelief in Allah and not repenting from it before seeing the punishment. 

Beneficial Points: 

1. Allah has messengers other than those specifically mentioned by name in the noble Qur’an. 

2. From among the favours of Allah is that He clearly marks out those signs of His that point to His oneness. 

3. Being happy with falsehood and its harmful consequences is dangerous. 

4. Bringing faith upon seeing the destructive punishment is of no use. 


o'' Cj* 

^ I 

o \ o \j>\ tJ L9® 

(§) 

^■A_s lx^=> j a 4 ^\j l_X*A«• \s Ix-j t 



10 Sjy. 





















Surah Fussilat (Explained in Detail) 



i4p_ 0b pufd, 


ki> 4 r' 


<yi^ 6l(^) 0^3?N 

t T-d 5 ^-r <£_ \ ~i\ ^ i < *f? A ^9 ^-i 




Ojoh^J o^*^3 c^3i(j ^ 

j^jp ^ ^ | 1^4.) aJ>j ^«3 jKjjj | 

(^) (j^lis G3^ is5\st&3^=!3^ \d_^Ljo\ o^3^l3^ I 


Fussilat 


477 


Part 24 


® Topic of the Surah: 

Mention of how to deal kindly with people who 
turn away from the Qur’an, by mentioning that the 
Qur’an is the truth and the consequences of reject¬ 
ing it. 

^Explanation: 

@) Ha MTm. The discussion on similar letters has 
already passed in Surah Al-Baqarah. 

@) This Qur’an is a revelation from Allah, the Be¬ 
neficent, the Merciful. 

(0) It is a book whose verses are perfectly clear; as 
clear as can be. He has made it an Arabic Qur’an 
for a nation that knows, because they are the ones 
who will benefit from its meanings and contents by 
achieving guidance towards the truth. 

@ It is a giver of glad tidings to the believers of 
the generous reward Allah has prepared for them, 
and a Warner for the disbelievers of the painful 
punishment of Allah. But the majority of them turn 
away from it; they do not listen open-heartedly to 
its contents. 

(Jp And they say, “our hearts are covered with mul¬ 
tiple veils so they do not comprehend what you are 
calling us to. Our ears are deaf to hearing what you 
say. There is a veil between you and us; none of 
your speech reaches us, so you carry on doing as 
you are on your path, and we will do the same on 
our path. We will never follow you. 

<jj} O Messenger! Say to these deniers: “I am only 
a human just like you are. I receive revelation from 
Allah that your true deity is only one deity who is 


Allah, so devote your worship to Him alone and seek forgiveness from Him for your sins. Clear loss is for the idolaters 
who worship others instead of Allah or ascribe partners with Him. 

@ Those who do not pay Zakat on their wealth are on the day of Judgement - with its everlasting blessings and painful 
torment in it- among the disbelievers. 

<J} Indeed, those who have faith in Allah and His messengers and do good deeds, for them is an everlasting reward which 
will never finish: Paradise. 

(Jp O Messenger! Say to these idolaters, rebuking them: “Why do you disbelieve in Allah who created the earth in two 
days: on Sunday and Monday, and you attribute equals to Him whom you worship instead of Him? He is the Lord of all 
creation.” 

He created firm mountains on it, which stabilise it and prevent it from shaking. And He proportioned the provisions 
of the people and animals by the fourth day, following on from the two previous days: Tuesday and Wednesday, equal for 
whoever wants to ask regarding it. 

@ Then Allah (may He be glorified) resolved to create the sky at a time when it was smoke, saying to it and the earth, 
“Submit to My command willingly or be forced, it has to be one of the two, They said, “We come willingly; O our Lord! 
We have no wish except your wish.” 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The disbelievers shut off all means of guidance that they had, deciding to remain on disbelief instead. 

2. The importance of Zakat is mentioned, that it is a pillar from the pillars of Islam. 

3. The whole universe has submitted and humbled itself to the command of Allah (may He be glorified). 




















0 cXZab a 

kiiS&i&StVAj 




fcrM 




UJ.u'll ^ Jll\ tjjj 

-^\&\ J %& of ($L£-c^ 


CJy. I 

^sCcii \^jj ^ij^jj^ \s 4 ^\ si ^ ji^oSi \jLy^ 








4f 2L* 


o 1 


l\ 


5^1^ ^_J Jfj$ 


I O? \^===*J OJ? JL^-A A-il)\^£b(^ji \ 


@ Then Allah completed the creation of the heav¬ 
ens in two days: Thursday and Friday. With that, 
the creation of the heavens and the earth was com¬ 
pleted in six days. Allah inspired in every heaven 
whatever He would decree concerning it and what¬ 
ever obedience and worship He would command. 

Allah also decorated the nearest heaven with stars, 
and protected it from the satans’ eavesdropping. All 
that is the decree of the Almighty who no one can 
overcome, and who is all aware of His creation. 

(Jjp So if these people turn away from bringing faith 
in what you have brought, then say to them: “I have 
warned you of a punishment that will fall upon you, 
like the punishment that fell upon the people of 
Hud, the ‘Ad, and the people of Saleh, the Thamud, 
when they rejected their messengers. 

@ When their messengers came to them, each fol¬ 
lowing the other in bringing one message, instruct¬ 
ing them to worship none other than Allah alone. 

The disbelievers said, “If our Lord wished to send 
down angels as messengers to us, He would have 
sent them. Therefore, we reject whatever you have 
been sent with, because you are humans like we 
are.” 

As for the people of Hud, the ‘Ad, together with 
their disbelief in Allah they showed undue arro¬ 
gance on earth and oppressed those around them. 

Having been deceived by their own strength, they 
said, “Who is there that is stronger than us?” There 
was no one stronger than them, according to their 
assumption, so Allah replied to them: “Do these 
people not know and see that the one who created 
them and gave them the strength that made them 
rebellious, is stronger than them?” They would reject the signs of Allah that Hud brought to them. 

@ So I sent upon them a wind that had with it a disturbing noise, on days of misfortune for them, due to the punishment 
which came to them. So that I may make them suffer a punishment of humiliation and disgrace in the world. And indeed, 
the punishment of the Hereafter that awaits them is more humiliating for them; they will not find anyone to help save 
them from the punishment. 

@ As for the people of Saleh, the Thamud, I guided them by making the path of truth clear to them, but they preferred 
deviance to guidance to the truth, so the humiliating punishment seized them because of the disbelief and sins they would 
commit. 

(Sj} And I saved those who had faith in Allah and His messengers and would be mindful of Allah by fulfilling His com¬ 
mands and refraining from the things He did not allowed. I saved them from the punishment that came upon their people. 

And on the day when the enemies of Allah will be gathered towards the hellfire, the Zabaniyah, appointed angels, will 
thrust each and every one of them into it. They will not be able to escape from it. 

When they come to the hellfire they are driven towards and deny the actions they would do in the world, their ears, 
eyes and skins will testify to their sins and disbelief in the world. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Turning away from the truth is the cause of destruction in the world and the Hereafter. 

2. Arrogance and being conceited with one’s strength both prevent a person from submitting to the truth. 

3. The punishment of the world and the Hereafter will be piled upon the disbelievers. 

4. The disbelievers being destroyed and believers being saved is a divine custom of Allah. 

5. One’s own limbs will testify against him on the Day of Judgement. 


^_%0 

\j*\j 0 



















@ And the disbelievers will say to their skins, “Why 
did you testify against us, by stating the things we 
used to do in the world?” Their skins will say in 
reply to them, “The one who grants everything the 
ability to speak, granted us the ability to speak. 
He is the one who created you initially when you 
were in the world, and to Him you will return in the 
Hereafter to give account and be requited.” 

@ You did not used to hide when committing sins 
to a degree that your ears, eyes and skins cannot 
testify against you, because you did not believe in 
accountability, punishment or reward after death. 
Rather, you thought that Allah (may He be glori¬ 
fied) was not aware of many things you did and 
that it remained hidden from Him, so you were de¬ 
ceived. 

@ And that very evil thought you thought up con¬ 
cerning your Lord, destroyed you, and so because 
of it, you became the very ones who lost in the 
world and the Hereafter. 

@ If these people against whom their ears, eyes 
and skins testified, are to be patient, the hellfire will 
be their abode and dwelling place they will go to. 
And if they seek the pleasure of Allah for them¬ 
selves and entry into Paradise, they will not achieve 
either of them, ever. 

@ I sent upon these disbelievers, companions from 
the satans. who would constantly be around them 
and beautifying disbelief, sins and rejection of the 
resurrection and requital, the punishment became 
incumbent upon them as the nations before from 
the humans and Jinn. Indeed they were the losers, 
who will lose themselves and their families on the 


Day of Judgement when they enter the fire. 

(Sjl When they became helpless in countering evidence with evidence, the disbelievers said, urging one another, “Do not 
listen to this Qur’an that Muhammad recites to you and do not submit to it, rather, shout and raise your voices when he 
recites it to you so that perhaps you can gain the upper hand over him and he stops reciting and calling towards it, then 
we will be relieved of him.” 

@ So we will definitely make those who disbelieved in Allah and rejected His messengers suffer from a severe pun¬ 
ishment on the Day of Judgement. I will definitely requite them with a punishment for the worst of their actions, i.e. 
ascribing partners with Allah and sins. 

djjS) That aforementioned requital is the requital of those who disbelieved in Him and rejected His messengers; it is the 
hellfire which they will live forever never to come out of it. It is a requital for their rejection of the verses of Allah and 
not believing in them despite their clarity and strength in proof. 

@ And those who disbelieved in Allah and rejected His messengers will say, “O our Lord! Show us those humans and 
Jinn who led us astray: Iblls who introduced disbelief and inviting towards it and the son of Adam who introduced blood¬ 
shed, so that we can put them in the hellfire under our feet; so that they are the lowest of the people and the ones most 
severely punished.” 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Thinking evil about Allah is a trait from the traits of disbelief. 

2. Disbelief and sins are causes of the satans ruling over the humans. 

3. The followers will desire that those they followed are the most severely punished on the Day of Judgement. 
















After Allah mentioned the requital of His enemies, 
He mentions the requital of His friends, by saying: 
@> Indeed, those who say, “Our Lord is Allah; we 
do not have any Lord other than Him.” and they are 
steadfast on fulfilling His commands and refrain 
from that which He has prohibited, the angels will 


| S Jyn* | 

St 

t A* 




Hum uiai which 11c na» piumuiicu, me angeio win j ^ ^ ^ ^ 't ^ 

descend upon them when death nears them, saying Cji\ 

to them. “Do not fear death or whatever is to come ^0 ** * . ^ ^ 

J ^ \^^jJ=====i]_j \ Jr? 


Cr^yj0 0 

£ 

\ 4sLjy >-^\^ 

SI (^) 


to them, “Do not fear death or whatever is to come II 
after it and do not grieve over what you are going to __ 
leave behind in the world. Take the glad tidings of 
Paradise which you were promised in the world for 
your faith in Allah and your good deeds.” 

@ “We were your friends in the worldly life; we 
used to correct you and protect you, and we will 
also be your friends in the Hereafter, so our friend¬ 
ship with you is continuous. In Paradise, you will 
be able to fulfil whatever your hearts desire and 
crave, and you will get whatever you seek.” 

(jp It is a provision prepared for you by a merciful 
Lord forgiving of the sins of those of His servants 
who repent to Him. 

jjj) There is no one whose speech is better than the 
one who calls towards the oneness of Allah and act¬ 
ing upon His law, whilst doing good actions that 
please Him, saying, “Indeed, I am one of those who 
submit and humble myself to Allah”. Indeed, who¬ 
ever does all that is the one who is best in speech. 

@ Doing good deeds in obedience to Allah that 
please Him, and doing evil and committing sins 
which anger Him, are not equal. Counter with good 
conduct the evil of the one who does bad to you. If 
you counter his evil by doing good to him, you will -it— j 
soon find the previous enmity you had between you 
change, and it will be as if he is now an affectionate close friend. 

@ Only those who are patient upon harm caused to them and difficulties they face from the people, are given the ability 
to display this praiseworthy character. Only those who are extremely fortunate are granted the ability to do it, because of 
the abundant goodness and immense benefit there is in it. 

@ And if the satan whispers evil to you at any time, hold fast to Allah and seek refuge in Him. He is the Hearing of 
whatever you say and the Knower of your situation. 




y&s \j 3i p 



(jp From the signs of Allah that point towards His greatness and oneness is the night and the day in their coming after one 
another, and the sun and moon. O people! Do not prostrate to the sun nor the moon; rather, prostrate to Allah alone who 
created them all, if you truly do worship Him. 

@ So if they show arrogance, turning away, not prostating to Allah the Creator, the angels that are with Allah glorify and 
praise Him (may He be glorified) throughout the day and night anyway, and they do not become bored of worshipping 
Him. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The status of steadfastness is great according to Allah. 

2. Steadfastness is a means of security. 

3. Calling towards Allah has a great status and is the most virtuous of actions. 

4. Bearing patience upon harm and countering with the best of character are two traits which a caller towards Allah has 
to have. 



















@ And also from among the signs of Allah that 
point towards His oneness and power to resurrect, 
is that you see the earth without any plants on it. 
Then, when He sends rainwater on it, it begins to 
move due to the hidden growth of seeds within it 
and it raises. Indeed, the being who revived this 
barren earth through growth is the one who will 
revive the dead and resurrect them to take them to 
account and requite them. Indeed, He is capable of 
everything; reviving the earth after it has become 
barren is not impossible for Him, nor is reviving 
the dead and resurrecting them from their graves. 

Indeed, those who deviate from Allah’s signs, 
rejecting or distorting them and turning others away 
from them are not hidden from us. Allah know who 
they are. So, is the one who will be thrown into the 
hellfire more privileged or the one who will come 
safe from the punishment on the Day of Judge¬ 
ment? O people! Do whatever good or bad you 
wish; Allah has made good and evil clear to you 
and He sees whatever you do from it. None of your 
actions are hidden from Him. 

Indeed, those who disbelieved in the Qur’an 
when it came to them from Allah will definitely be 
punished on the Day of Judgement. 

Falsehood in the form of subtraction, addition, 
change or distortion cannot come to it directly or 
indirectly. It is a revelation from One who is Wise 
in His creation, decree and legislation, and praise¬ 
worthy in all conditions. 

After Allah mentioned the state of those who reject 
the revelation, He encourages His Messenger to be 
patient and consoles him with the rejection, slander and mockery his fellow Messenger brothers before him faced. He 
says, 

jj) O Messenger! The rejection directed towards you is nothing but the same that has been directed towards the messen¬ 
gers before you, so be patient, because your Lord Forgiving of those of His servants who repent to Him, but one who is 
painfully punishing of those who insist on their sins and do not repent. 

@ Had I revealed this Qur’an in a language other than that of the Arabs, the disbelievers among them would have said, 
“Why are its verses not made clear to us so that we can understand them?” Can the Qur’an be in any language other than 
Arabic, while the one who brings it is an Arab? O Messenger! Say to these people: For those people who bring faith in 
Allah and believe in His messengers, the Qur’an is a guidance from deviance and a cure for the ignorance and its con¬ 
sequences in the hearts. As for those who do not have faith in Allah, their ears are deaf and they are blinded from it so 
they do not understand it. These people are called from a distant place, so how could they hear the voice of the caller? 
@ Verily I gave Moses the Torah and it was disagreed upon. Some believed in it, while others disbelieved in it. Had there 
not been a promise from Me that there will be judgement passed between the servants on the Day of Judgement in matters 
they disputed over,judgement would already have been passed upon those who disputed in the Torah. I would have made 
the ones on the truth clear from those on falsehood and honoured those on the truth whilst disgracing those on falsehood. 
Indeed, the disbelievers are definitely in suspicious doubts with regards the Qur’an. 

(SjS) Whoever does good deeds, the benefit of his actions returns to him, because no one’s good deeds benefit Allah. And 
whoever does bad deeds, the effect of that return to him because no one’s sins harm Allah. Allah will soon requite each 
person according to what they deserve. O Messenger! Your Lord is not oppressive to His servants; He will never decrease 
even one good deed of theirs, nor increase an evil one. 

Beneficial Points: 

1. Allah has protected the Qur’an from change and distortion, and He (may He be glorified) has taken up the responsibil¬ 
ity for this protection, as opposed to the previous divine books. 

2. The idolater Arabs have no argument due to the fact that the Qur’an was revealed in their language. 

3. Oppression is negated from Allah and fairness is affirmed to Him. 


S§p And indeed, it is a noble and protected book. 




i A\ 




jr £ ™ 






Fussilat 


Part 24 
















1 ls^ btS^^ 

f*e^y*2j (&) j^-^ 9 \S^,La <i)^ yj is g.i^=^^i | 
0 ( j^u->c^ Cr 2 -^ j 4 ^ C >5 

Ji &!&&$&& 
aL^UV j 9 ^ cj-j ^ -^ 91 

^lc ^5 c^j ^ 9 ^ (S^ WS <^)-^ 0^95) 

tjL*^ ^ ^k? 0 J^Ap c9 -X-P 

C&Z' £^OJ \s>J^^\ i^S \ -^9j^rr^S O^J^ 


<*&j 


@ To Allah alone the knowledge of the hour re¬ 
turns. He alone knows when it will occur. No one 
besides Him knows this. No fruit emerge from their 
protective sheath and no female conceives except 
by His knowledge. Nothing of that escapes Him. 

On the day when Allah will call the idolaters who 
used to worship idols together with Him, reproach¬ 
ing them for their worship of those idols: “Where 
are My partners that you used to worship besides 
Me and claim they are My partners?” The idolaters 
will say: We confess before you. There is not one of 
us who testifies now that you have a partner. 

(Sj| The idols that they used to call on will disappear 
from them and they will be certain that they will 
have no escape from Allah’s punishment. 

@ Man does not tire of asking for health, wealth, 
children and other favours. If he is afflicted by 
poverty, sickness and the like then he becomes ex¬ 
tremely despondent of Allah’s mercy. 

@ If I have to let him taste from Me health, rich¬ 
es and well-being after difficulty and sickness that 
afflicted him he will certainly say: This is mine, 
because I am worthy and deserving of it. I do not 
think the hour will take place. If it is assumed that 
the hour will take place then I will have the very 
best by Allah. Just as He favoured me in the world 
because I was deserving of that. He will favour me 
in the afterlife. I will certainly tell those who reject¬ 
ed Allah about the disbelief and the sins they did 
and I will make them taste a punishment of extreme 
severity. 

@ When I bless man with the favour of health, 
well-being and the like, he becomes unmindful of 
Allah’s remembrance and obedience and turns away in pride. When sickness, poverty and the like afflict him then he 
becomes one of long supplication to Allah, complaining to Him of what has afflicted him for Him to remove it. He does 
not thank His Lord when He blesses him and is not patient when He tests him. 

dj) O Messenger! Say to these idolaters who reject: Tell me, if this Qur’an was from Allah and then you rejected and 
disbelieved in it, what will be your condition? Who is more wrong than the person who is stubborn towards the truth 
despites its appearance and the clarity and strength of its evidence. 

(jp I will show them My signs in the heavens and on earth. I will show them My signs within souls so that it will become 
clear to them without any doubt that this Qur’an is the truth without any doubt. Is it not enough for these idolaters that the 
Qur’an is true by Allah’s testimony that it is from Him? Who can be a greater witness than Allah? If they were seeking 
the truth they would have sufficed with the testimony of their Lord. 

(jp Surely, these idolaters doubt the meeting of their Lord on the Day of Judgement as they deny resurrection and they 
dont believe in the afterlife. Therefore, they do not prepare for it with righteous action. Indeed, Allah’s knowledge and 
power encompasses everything. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The knowledge of the hour is only with Allah alone. 

2. The way disbelievers deal with Allah’s favours and retribution is haphazard and disorderly. 

3. Allah’s knowledge and power encompasses everything. 


|(^) J^====ojt J 


















l>£'j^ 0j^^*i ^ ^-*5 \j*j 



JJ^i> ^-4^" C^ l^J JL^^.JaJsj’-- <Ji\ 'i\^j\ S ^J^ 0^ 
iSfi ^ <^1^30 

^ 5j^j 0 _j£^\ 

_S*j^ Jf^t5 C^j>*4j^S<-^J^ 2 ^j^ c^j'-£$ 

0 dJ iU=3^oj ^|^5 SJi 


The Consultation (Surah Al-Shura) 

^ Themes of the Surah: 

An explanation of the reality of revelation and the 
Muhammadan mission and that it is an extension of 
revelation to the prophets. 

® Explanation: 

(JfJ) This surah begins with the disconnected letters, 
the explanation for which has already preceeded in 
Surah Baqarah. 

@ This surah begins with the disconnected letters, 
the explanation for which has already preceeded in 
Surah Baqarah. 

jjl) The One Who has revealed this Qur’an to you 
is Allah. He, (may He be glorified), is the One Who 
sent revelation to the prophets before you. You are 
thus not the first to whom Allah sent revelation. He 
is the Mighty in His decision and the Dominant in 
His affair. 

{J) Everything in the heavens and on earth belong 
to Him alone. He created, owns and controls all of 
it. He is High in His self and in terms of His status 
and domination, and Majestic in His self. 

CfJS) Part of His majesty, (may He be glorified), is 
that the heavens despite their greatness and height 
are almost split apart. The angels glorify the praises 
of their Lord out of submission and in reverence 
of Him, and they seek forgiveness from Allah for 
those on earth. Indeed, Allah is the One Who for¬ 
gives the sins of those servants of His who repent 
and He is merciful to them. 

(Jj) Those who take idols besides Allah whom they 
align with and worship besides Allah, Allah lies in 
wait for them. He records their actions and He will recompense them for that. You, O Messenger, are not in charge of 
them and you will not be questioned about their actions. You are only one who conveys the message. 

(0) Just as I sent revelation to the prophets before you, O Messenger, I have revealed to you an Arabic Qur’an so that 
you may warn Makkah and the Arab towns around it and thereafter the entire mankind, and warn people of the day of 
resurrection when Allah will gather the earlier ones and the later ones in one plain for reckoning and recompense. There 
is no doubt in the occurrence of that day, on which people will be divided into two groups: One group will be in Paradise, 
and these are the believers; and one group will be in the Fire, and these are the disbelievers. 

(Sj) If Allah willed to make them one nation on the religion of Islam He would have done so and entered them all into 
Paradise. But, His wisdom demanded that He enters whoever He wills into Islam and then enters him into Paradise. Those 
who wrong themselves by disbelief and sins, will have no one to protect them and no helper to rescue them from Allah’s 
punishment. 

{Jj Instead, these idolaters have taken allies whom they align with besides Allah. Allah is the true Protector. Others be¬ 
sides Him can bring no benefit nor harm. He gives life to the dead by resurrecting them for reckoning and recompense. 
He has power over all things and nothing is outside His ability, (may He be glorified). 

{jp Whatever you, O People, differ in about the principle and secondary matters of your religion, the judgement for that 
rests with Allah, and His book and the tradition of His Messenger (peace be upon him) must be used as a reference. The 
One who possesses these attributes is my Lord. It is on Him that I rely in all my affairs and it is to Him that I turn by 
repenting to Him. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Allah’s greatness is apparent in everything. 

2. The supplication for good by the angels in favour of those who have faith. 

3. The messenger’s task is to convey and show people the path towards goodness. 

4. People in the afterlife will be in two groups: Wretched and fortunate. 

5. The Qur’an and the Sunnah are references for the believers in all their affairs, especially when there is disagreement. 






























@ Allah is the creator of the heavens and the cre¬ 
ator of the earth without any precedent. He made 
for you from amongst your own kind spouses. He 
also made for you pairs of camels, cattle and sheep, 
so that they can multiply for your sake. He creates 
you through the spouses that He made for you by 
your marrying one another. He provides livelihood 
for you through the cattle that He made for you, 
from their meat and milk. Nothing of His creation 
resembles Him. He is the One Who hears the state¬ 
ments of His servants, and the One Who sees their 
actions. Nothing of that escapes Him and He will 
recompense them for their actions: if good then 
with good, and if evil then with bad. 

@ To Him alone belong the keys to the treasures 
of the heavens and the earth. He expands provision 
for whoever of His servants He wills, as a test to 
see whether they are grateful or not? He narrows it 
for whoever of His servants He wills, as a trial to 
see whether they are patient or become angry with 
Allah’s decree? He has knowledge of all things. 

Nothing in which lies the interests of His servants 
is hidden from Him. 

(jp He has ordained for you religious matters simi¬ 
lar to what I instructed Noah to convey and act on 
and what I have revealed to you, O Messenger. He 
has ordained for you similar to what I instructed 
Abraham, Moses and Jesus to convey and act on. 

The gist of this is: Uphold the religion and leave 
out division therein. What you call the idolaters to¬ 
wards, such as the declaring the oneness of Allah 
and leaving out the worship of others besides Him, 
is difficult for them. Allah chooses whichever of His servants He wills and guides them to His worship and obedience and 
He guides to Him those of them who return to Him by repenting from their sins. 




Co2^-^ < 

0 


\b3 6 

(£) 

A ^ ^ " 

JL-& 



isi jlJ===6 




Al-Shura 



Cjp The disbelievers and the idolaters only became divided after the proof for the mission of Muhammad (peace be 
upon him) to them was established. Their division was only on account of rivalry and oppression. Were it not for what 
had already been in Allah’s knowledge that the punishment will be postponed from them until a time determined in His 
knowledge, which is the day of resurrection, Allah would have decided between them and punished them quickly on ac¬ 
count of their rejection of Allah and denial of His messengers. Those Jews who were made to inherit the Torah, and those 
Christians who were made to inherit the Gospel, after their predecessors and these idolaters, are in doubt about and deny 
this Qur’an which Muhammad (peace be upon him) has brought. 


@ Call to this upright religion and remain firm on it as Allah has instructed you. Do not follow their false desires and say 
them when disputing with them: I have faith in Allah and in the scriptures which Allah sent down to His messengers. Al¬ 
lah has instructed me to judge between you with justice. Allah, the One Whom I worship, is both our Lord and your Lord. 
We have our deeds, whether good or bad and you have your deeds, whether good or bad. There is no quarrel between us 
after the evidence is apparent and the path is clear. Allah will bring us all together and to Him is the return on the day of 
resurrection. He will then recompense each one as He deserves and then it will become clear who is true and who is false 
and who is right and who is wrong. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The religion of the prophets in their fundamentals is one religion. 

2. The importance of unity in speech and the danger of disagreement therein. 

3. Some of the components for the success of calling to Allah are: Validity of principle, steadfastness on it, avoiding the 
following of desires, justice, focussing on common ground, leaving out futile debate, and reminding of the common end. 



















© Those who quarrel with invalid arguments about 
this religion sent down to Muhammad (peace be 
upon him) after people have responded to his call 
due to the strength of its proof and have entered 
into it, the argument of these people who quarrel 
is void and holds no weight by their Lord and by 
the believers. It has no effect. On them is Allah’s 
anger due to their disbelief and rejection of the truth 
and they will have a severe punishment that awaits 
them on the day of resurrection. 

After Allah explained the invalidity of the argu¬ 
ments of the disbeliever He explained the origin of 
the valid arguments used by the Muslim, which is 
the Qur’an, in the verse: 

© Allah is the One Who sent down the Qur’an 
with the truth, in which there is no doubt. In it He 
commanded with justice so that people judge by it. 
The hour that these people deny may be close, and 
it is known that everything that is coming is close. 
© Those who do not believe in it seek to 
hasten it, because they do not believe in reckoning, 
reward or punishment. But those who have faith in 
Allah are fearful of it because they do not know 
their fate after it and they certainly know it to be the 
truth in which there is no doubt. Indeed, those who 
dispute about the 

Hour and doubt its occurrence are in error that is far 
from the truth. 

© Allah is kind towards His servants. He provides 
for whoever He wills and expands their provision, 
and He narrows it for whoever He wills out of mer¬ 
cy for them, even though it may appear otherwise. 
He is the Strong, Whom none can overpower and 


the Mighty, Who takes retribution from His enemies. 

© Whoever wants the rewards of the afterlife and works for it, I will multiply his reward for him, by multiplying the 
reward of a good deed by ten times up to seven hundred times or even more. Whoever wants the world alone, I will give 
him his alotted share in it and he will not have any share in the afterlife as he preferred the world over it. 

© Or do these idolaters have Allahs besides Allah, who have ordained for them religious matters that Allah did not au¬ 
thorize them to ordain such as ascribing partners to Allah, declaring unlawful what He made lawful and declaring lawful 
what He made unlawful? Had it not been for the fixed time that Allah had set to decide between those who differ, and that 
He will postpone them until such time, He would have decided between them. Those who wrong themselves by ascribing 
partners to Allah and committing sins, will have a painful punishment that awaits them on the day of resurrection. 

© You, O Messenger, will see those who wrong themselves by ascribing partners to Allah and committing sins fearful 
of the punishment because of the wrongdoing they did. The punishment will inevitably fall on them. Their mere fear 
that is devoid of repentance will not be of any use to them. Those who have faith in Allah and in His messengers, and do 
righteous actions will be in contrast to them. They will be enjoying luxury in gardens of Paradise. They will have what¬ 
ever type of endless bliss they wish for by their Lord. That is the great bounty which no other bounty can come close to. 
® Beneficial Points: 

1. The fear of a believer for the terrors of the Day of Resurrection assists in his preparation for it. 

2. Allah’s grace to His servants is apparent. 

3. The danger of giving preference to the world over the Hereafter. 























i An 






e3j\i> cyts t|» 




vjil 


@ That is the good news that Allah gives at the 
hand of His Messenger to those have faith in Allah 
and His messengers and do righteous actions. Say, 

O Messenger: I do not ask of you, for conveying the 
truth, any reward besides one reward the benefit of 
which returns to you. That is, you love me because 
of my blood relationship with you. Whoever does 
a good deed, I will multiply its reward for him, by 
multiplying the reward of a good deed by ten times. 

Allah Forgiving towards the sins of those of His 
servants who repent to Him, and is grateful for the 
righteous actions they do seeking His pleasure. 

@ One of the claims of the idolaters is that they say: 

Muhammad has invented a lie against his Lord by 
his claim of being His messenger. One of the things 
that confirm that the Qur’an is revelation from Al¬ 
lah is that if He willed He could have made you 
forget this Qur’an. But Allah removes falsehood 
and establishes the truth. This is what occurred to 
the call of the idolaters, which was removed, and 
the call of Islam which was established. He knows 
what is in the hearts of His servants. Nothing is hid¬ 
den from Him. 

(Sj) He, (may He be glorified), is the One Who ac¬ 
cepts the repentance of His servants from disbelief 
and sins when they repent to Him. He overlooks 
the wrongdoings that they committed. He knows 
everything that you do. Nothing of your actions are 
hidden from Him and He will give you the recom¬ 
pense for them. 

@ He responds to the supplication of those who 
have faith in Allah and His messengers, and gives 
them more out of His bounty that they did not ask 
for. Those who reject Allah and His messengers will have a strong punishment awaiting them on the day of resurrection. 
@ If Allah had to expand the provision for all of His servants, they would have transgressed on earth by oppression. But 
He, (may He be glorified), sends down provision to the extent that He wills to expand or narrow it. He is well aware and 
observant of the states of His servants. He gives for a reason and withholds for a reason also. 

djl He is the One Who sends down the rain to His servants after they had lost hope of its coming down. He spreads His 
mercy by causing the earth to sprout after sending down the rain. He is the One Who takes charge of the affairs of His 
servants, the One Who deserves praise in every state. 

One of the signs of Allah that prove His power and oneness is the creation of the heavens and the creation of the earth, 
and the wondrous creations that He spread throughout them. He is able to bring them all together for the gathering and 
recompense whenever He wills. He is not incapable of doing this just as He was not incapable of creating them the first 
time. 

Whatever difficulty afflicts you, O people, in yourselves and your wealth it is because of the sins that your hands 
earned. Allah overlooks many of them and does not take you to task for them. 

@ You are not able to save yourselves from your Lord by running away when He wants to punish you. You do not have 
anyone besides Him to take charge of your affairs nor anyone to help you by removing the punishment if He intends it 
for you. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The person who calls to Allah does not seek a reward from people. 

2. Expansion and narrowing of provision is subject to divine wisdom that may be hidden from many people. 

3. Sins and wrongdoings are causes of difficulties. 




^ ^_ \ ^\ **{^) Jo 

jjb lV/O 
















JZ * 


(j.o! 

^ < ** -C-^ ^ ^ ^ J ^ 

£l£? tZsfdlt ^ 

^ ^T'^/O ^ 0,^7 S^s" ^ * fi J ** 

r^$ ^jL^c£-l fA^ 9 (^) 

o^^ai \^a\j\^\ 01^1? ($) Oj^iio 

\1pJP 1-^4.aSj^ 3^I^)3^j{$) 

^ £cL^ 

*d ( \ \ c^) /yg. j^SrA^V^ A^Vl? Jqo 

<^ 5 $ J^L^ 0 *p t T i^S^So* 1 ^ 

Ji^ly^ LLfe l^£j>s>jyJp 0 %S) dJ\ j^J^) 
iSj^j ^Jo (j* CL ^ *$ (3^4 0*3 ($)-4y^ 

®J^o^4^oj_^^W dUP' 


Al-Shura 


487 


Part 25 




© From among His signs that prove His power and 
oneness, are the ships sailing the ocean like moun¬ 
tains in their height and elevation. 

© If Allah wished to make the wind that moves 
them still He would have done so, and they will 
remain fixed on the ocean motionless. In that which 
has been mentioned about the creation of ships and 
the subjugation of the winds there are clear signs 
of Allah’s power for every person who is patient in 
difficulty and trials, and who is grateful for Allah’s 
favours to him. 

© Or if Allah, (may He be glorified), willed to 
destroy those ships by sending gale-force winds, 
He would have done so on account of the sins that 
people earn. He overlooks many of the sins of His 
servants and does not punish them for those. 

© When those ships are destroyed by sending gale- 
force winds, those who dispute in respect of Allah’s 
signs, in order to refute them, will know that they 
have no escape from destruction. Then they will 
only call on Allah and leave those besides Him. 

© The wealth, fame and children that you have 
been given, O people, is the enjoyment of this 
worldly life which will vanish and come to an end. 
The everlasting bliss is the bliss of Paradise that Al¬ 
lah has prepared for those who have faith in Allah 
and His messengers and who rely on him alone in 
all their matters. 

© Those who distance themselves from major and 
offensive sins and when they are angry at those who 
offend them by words or deeds they forgive their 
mistake and do not punish them for it. This pardon 
is a grace they offer when there is goodness and 


benefit in it. 

© Those who respond to their Lord, by doing what He instructed and leaving out what He prohibited, and they complete 
their ritual prayer in the most perfect manner. Those who consult one another in matters of importance to them and who 
spend from what He have provided for them seeking Allah’s pleasure. 

© Those who when afflicted by oppression, they defend themselves, in honour and respect for themselves, if the oppres¬ 
sor is not worthy of pardon. This defence is justified, especially if there is no benefit in pardon. 

© Whoever wants to take his right is allowed to do so, but in equal measure without any excess or transgression. Whoev¬ 
er pardons the one who wrongs him and does not take him to task for that wrong, and sets right the relationship with his 
brother, then his reward is with Allah. He does not love those who do wrong by oppressing people in their selves, wealth, 
or honour. Rather, He detests them. 

© For those who defend themselves, there will be no blame as they had taken their right. 

© Blame and retribution will only be for those who oppress people and commit sins on earth. For such people there will 
be a painful punishment in the Hereafter. 

© As for those who are patient and who overlook the harm caused to them by others, then such patience will bring good 
for them and for the society. This is a praiseworthy thing and only a person of great fortune is blessed with this. 

© Those whom Allah does not bless with guidance and lets them stray from the truth, they will have no one to take 
charge of their affairs after Him. You will see those who wrong themselves by disbelief and sins, when they will see the 
punishment on the day of resurrection, longingly saying: If only we are able to return to the world and repent to Allah. 
Beneficial Points: 

1. Patience and gratitude are means that lead to pondering over the signs of Allah. 

2. The status of consultation in Islam is great. 

3. The importance of pardoning the wrongdoer, because Allah loves those who pardon. 

4. The permissibility of taking the oppressor to task with the equivalent of his oppression. 



















@ You will see, O Messenger, these wrongdoers 
when they are exposed to the fire, whilst they are 
humiliated and disgraced, looking at people surrep¬ 
titiously due to their extreme fear for it. Those who 
had faith in Allah and His messengers will say: The 
true losers are those who lost themselves and their 
families on the day of resurrection on account of 
the punishment of Allah that they received. Indeed, 
those who wrong themselves by disbelief and sins 
will be in a lasting punishment that will never end. 
djS) They will have no allies to help them by res¬ 
cuing them from Allah’s punishment on the day of 
resurrection. Those whom Allah does not bless with 
the truth and lets them go astray, will never have 
any path that leads them to guidance to the truth. 

@ Respond, O people, to your Lord by rushing to 
fulfil His instructions and avoid His prohibitions 
and leaving out procrastination, before the Day of 
Resurrection comes, which cannot be pushed back 
when it arrives. You will have no place to take ref¬ 
uge in and you will not be able to deny the sins that 
you have perpetrated in the world. 

(^) If they turn away from what you instruct them, 
then I have not sent you, O Messenger, as a guard¬ 
ian over them to watch their actions. Your duty is 
only to convey what I have instructed you to con¬ 
vey and their reckoning is left to Allah. When I give 
man a taste of My mercy of riches, health etc. he 
rejoices in it. But when a trial of difficulty befalls 
them on account of their sins, their nature is to be 
ungrateful for Allah’s favours and become angry at 
what Allah had in His wisdom decreed. 

(Sj| To Allah belongs the control of the heavens and 
the control of the earth. He creates whatever He wills, be it male, female etc. He gives to whoever He wills females and 
deprives them of males; and He gives to whoever He wills males and deprives them of females. 

Or He makes for whoever He wills both males and females and makes whoever He wills barren and childless. He 
knows what occurs and what will occur in the future. This is on account of the completeness of His knowledge and per¬ 
fection of His wisdom. Nothing is hidden from Him. He is able to do all things, nothing is outside His ability, 
dj} It is not correct for a human being that Allah speaks to Him except through revelation that He sends to him, or by 
direct speech but from behind a veil without seeing Him, or by sending an angel as a messenger such as Gabriel, who 
then reveals to the human messenger with Allah’s permission what Allah wishes to reveal. He, (may He be glorified), is 
high in His Self and Attributes, and is wise in His creation, decree and laws. 

Beneficial Points: 

1. The necessity of rushing to fulfil Allah’s instructions and avoid His prohibitions. 

2. The task of the Messenger is to convey, and the results are in Allah’s Hands. 

3. The disbeliever’s rejection of Allah’s favours is evidence against him. 

4. Allah sends revelation to His prophets in various ways, based on reasons known to Him, (may He be glorified). 


a yS iA3 ojS jt\ 

oli=== Laj *( £) 






















«.Loa 5 ij^\ “^/j 



H0®LfWi 




,1 WMi.'C'A 

filiate* 


Gu*3 

^n|/^fc3 CjD -=^1 ^ 

i^^Jv^oS 4^Sl 0^=^J 

i| cS^ dx^ Jp 0 d-^/^ ^~ ~ ‘ : ~ : =J 

6j iyf^^\j ^^ cA/^4i}^^J 0 


<0 Just as I sent revelation to the prophets before 
you, O Messenger, I revealed to you a Qur’an from 
Me. Prior to it you did not know about the heavenly 
scriptures revealed to the messengers, and you did 
not know what is faith? But I revealed this Qur’an 
as a light by which I guide whomever of My serv¬ 
ants I wish. You show people a straight path, which 
is the religion of Islam. 

@ The path of Allah to Whom belongs whatever 
is in the heaven and whatever is in the earth. He 
created, owns and controls all of it. Definitely all 
matters return to Allah alone in their estimation and 
planning. 

The Gold Adornment (Surah Al-Zukhruf) 

® Themes of the Surah: 

An explanation of the proper Qur’anic morals and 
values and a refutation of the false concepts of ig¬ 
norance. 

® Explanation: 

(fp) Ha MTm. The discussion on similar letters has 
already passed in Surah Al-Baqarah. 

© Allah swears an oath by the scripture revealed to 
Muhammad, that is clear to whoever ponders over 
it and that makes Allah’s sacred law clear. 

@ I have revealed it as a Qur’an in the language of 
the Arabs, in the hope that you, O people in whose 
language it was revealed - will comprehend and un¬ 
derstand its meanings to transmit it to other nations. 
@ This Qur’an is in the Preserved Tablet with us in 
the highest gathering and is high in status, honour 
and position. It is wise in that the instructions con¬ 
tained in it are not devoid of wisdom, and it is perfect without any contradiction or disagreement. 

{J) I will not leave out the revelation of the Qur’an to you and calling you to monotheism because you are engrossed in 
ascribing partners to Allah and violating His prohibitions. I will not do so, as mercy for you demands otherwise. 

Cp How many a messenger did I send in previous nations. 

Cp Whenever a prophet came to those previous nations from Allah they used to mock at him. 

@ I destroyed those who were mightier than those nations, so we not incapable of destroying those who are weaker than 
them. The description of the destruction of the previous nations has passed in the Qur’an, such as the Ad, Thamud, nation 
of Lot and the people of Madyan. 

O Messenger! If you ask these idolaters who deny, “Who created the heavens and who created the earth?” they will 
say in response to your question, The Mighty whom none can overpower, the Knower of everything, created them. 

@ Allah is the One who made the earth for you stable and firm. He made for you in it paths in its mountains and valleys, 
in the hope that you will be guided by them in your travel. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The importance of revelation for the guidance of people. It is like the spirit in the body. 

2. The guidance attributed to the Messenger (peace be upon him) is the guidance of giving direction not the guidance of 
granting success. 

3. The affirmation by the idolaters of Allah’s oneness in lordship will not benefit them on the day of resurrection. 





Al-Zukhruf 




Part 25 




























Jua/*La 

^*zrj^£===* ^ i3^lS^_J (^) ^l^Pr^^SS" 

^\j 4%&P 
lsJ^ 

< j £^5 ^ 3jj&*r** (£) 

JjClJj-^j ob ^]^CL^, J3^ j*\ 0 Cfy^jyi^====>] 

(^) Vj 





@ The one who sends down water from the heav¬ 
ens in proportion to what suffices you, your ani¬ 
mals and crops, then revives with it a barren land in 
which there is no growth. Just as Allah revives that 
barren land with growth, He will revive you for the 
resurrection. 

@ And He has made ships and livestock for you 
which you ride on your travels; boarding the ships 
over the sea and mounting the livestock over land. 

@ He had created for you all that, in the hope that 
you settle yourselves on the backs of your mounts 
during your travels and then remember the blessing 
of your Lord over you in your hearts, in that He 
has made them subservient to you when you mount 
them, saying with your tongues: “The being who 
made these mounts subservient for us is pure and ■ 
glorified. We control them, whilst we would not 
have been able to do so if it had not been for His 
making them subservient to us.” 

“And indeed, we are definitely going to return 
to our Lord alone for accountability and requital.” * 

{§} The idolaters claim that some of the creations 
are the offspring of the Creator (may He be glori¬ 
fied), when they said, “The angels are the daughters . 
of Allah”. Indeed, the human who makes these kind 
of statements is very ungrateful and deviant. 

@ O idolaters! Do you say: “Allah has chosen 
daughters for Himself from among the things He 
creates”, whilst He has privileged you with male 
offspring? What an absurd distribution this is which 
you claim! 

@ When one of them is given news of the birth of ' 
a female whom he attributes to his Lord, his face 
becomes gloomy out of severe grief and sadness, and he himself becomes full of anger. How then can he attribute to his 
Lord the very thing that he himself is saddened by when informed of it? 

Do they attribute to their Lord the one who is brought up in adornment and is unclear in speech when arguing due to 
its femininity? 

@ They also regard as feminine the angels that are in reality the servants of The Merciful. Were they present at the time of 
Allah created them, so that they would know that they are actually females? The angels will record this statement of theirs 
and they will be questioned regarding it on the Day of Judgement. And they will be punished for it because of their lies. 

(jjp And they say, using divine decree as evidence, “If Allah willed that we did not worship the angels, we would not have 
worshipped them. So because He willed for it to happen, it proves He was happy with it.” They make this statement out 
of ignorance; they are only lying. 

(jp Or, have I given these idolaters a book before the Qur’an that allows them to worship other than Allah, which they are 
holding fast to and using as evidence? 

No! That has not happened. Rather, they are using their blind following as evidence, saying, “Indeed, we found our 
forefathers before us upon a belief and they used to worship idols. We are continuing in their footsteps in worshipping 
them.” 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Every blessing requires gratitude. 

2. The idolaters are deviated in their ideas of their Lord, such that they attribute daughters to Him whilst they dislike them 
for themselves. 

3. Using divine decree as an excuse for committing sins is invalid. 

4. Seeing is a fundamental in proving reality. 

5. Following blindly is dangerous. 




Al-Zukhruf 


490 


Part 25 


















' T ^l £-\j\ £. ~ks>^ l£ -XJfcVi l)^ '*' 

I ^ 2 > is (^j is 

I 2t Aa£ 9t \\S sis (^) 1 lbJ$3^l ^L-J^O^cJii^ 
J|^b3 l£ ^ ^($) Oj 


t$) Oi-r^ d^QJ (jf^l^ ^^-cSr > > & ^^3 ^3^ ii^a 
_U Isj C ^ ) iL^/ja^l^p \ j |j'j->^ \ JdAlj Is 

|j^~l ^j^CsJ^xaf ^A^jo C^Z) ^ 

s ^3 ($) ^_3 1/=^ 

Ij^ a^-j s u ^ y^UA-*^ dJW3 5 j»\(j^\li^ 0^5 tl^ 

($) Oj&Qal V& 


Al-Zukhruf 


491 


Part 25 


@ And just as these people have lied and used the 
blind following of their forefathers as evidence, O 
Messenger, I did not send any messenger to any 
community before you, except that those living in 
luxury in that village said, “Indeed, we found our 
forefathers upon a belief, and we are following in 
their footsteps”, so your nation is not any different 
in that regard. 

{§} Their messengers said to them, “Will you follow 
your forefathers even if I brought to you something 
that was better than the belief they were on?” They 
said, “Indeed, we reject whatever you and the mes¬ 
sengers before you have been sent with.” 

@ So I took retribution from the nations that reject¬ 
ed the messengers before you and I destroyed them. 
So ponder over what the outcome of the rejectors 
was, because their outcome was painful. 

@ O Messenger! Remember when Abraham said 
to his father and his people: “Indeed, I am innocent 
of the idols you worship instead of Allah.” 

{§p “Except for Allah who created me, because He 
will soon guide me to follow the true religion of His 
and that will benefit me.” 

(jP And Abraham made this monotheistic statement 
of his remain in his progeny after him. There re¬ 
mained among them those who would worship Al¬ 
lah alone and not attribute any partners with Him, 
in the hope that they turn to Allah having repented 
from ascribing partners with Him and sins. 

@ I did not hasten the destruction upon these re¬ 
jecting idolaters. Rather, I let them enjoy remaining 
in the world and I let their forefathers do the same, 
until the Qur’an and a clear Messenger: Muham¬ 


mad (peace be upon him) came to them. 

{§} And when this Qur’an came to them, which was the undoubted truth, they said, “This is sorcery which Muhammad 
intends to bewitch us with. We definitely reject it and will never believe in it.” 

@) The rejecting idolaters say, “Why did Allah not reveal this Qur’an upon one of the two great men of Makkah or Taif: 
Al-Walld ibn ‘Uqbah or 4 Urwah ibn Mas‘ud Al-Thaqafi, instead of revealing it upon the poor, orphaned Muhammad?” 
@ O Messenger! Do they distribute the mercy of your Lord, that they can give it to and prevent from it whomsoever they 
wish? It is I who distributed their provisions between them in the world making some of them rich and some poor, so that 
they are subservient to each other. The mercy of your Lord to His servants in the afterlife is better than the temporary, 
mortal things of the world that these people hoard. 

{jp Had it not been that humanity was on one creed of disbelief, I would have made in the houses of those who disbelieved 
in Allah roofs of silver and stairs upon which they could climb. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Following blindly was one of the causes of the previous nations deviating. 

2. It is necessary to proclaim innocence from disbelief and disbelievers. 

3. Monotheism remained in the progeny of Abraham (peace be upon him). 

4. Apostleship is a divine honour. It has no connection with human standards. 

5. The distribution of sustenance is down to the wisdom of Allah. 

6. The worldly life is insignificant to Allah, and because of it’s insignificance He gives to disbelievers as He wishes. 

























Sqj AXPV^>^\j\^ jJ\ o^->ni\£^L®1^ j^== 

9 j cl/ij^? cy 8 




r^ 


-W\ 

^\* 


w 


-r ><’’■-!“ ^“'.T 

w)ojX-£-V^>' 


& 


Joo 


^-^5 oj& {^) c^a 

\Jol_3 {£) (j| 

<s ^>\ ($) ^ ov*-^ 


@ And I would make doors for their houses and 
give them elevated seats to recline on, as a trial and 
to gradually lead them into destruction. 

@ I would also give them gold. All that is only the 
temporary enjoyment of the world; its benefit is lit¬ 
tle because of its ultimate extinction. However O 
Messenger, the bounties of the afterlife are better 
according to your Lord, for those who are mind¬ 
ful of Him by fulfilling His commands and refrain 
from that which He has prohibited. 

@ And whoever turns away from this Qur’an that 
was revealed to Muhammad (peace be upon him), 

I shall set a satan upon him who will lure him with 
falsehood and lead him astray; it will remain with 
him wherever he goes. 

@ Indeed, these satan companions who have been 
set upon those who turn away from the Qur’an, pre¬ 
vent them from the religion of Allah. They are una¬ 
ble to fulfil His commands and refrain from things 
He has not allowed; they think that they are guided 
to the truth and so they do not repent from their 
deviance. 

(jp) Until when the one who turns away from the 
remembrance of Allah will come to Him on the Day 
of Judgement, he will longingly say, “O compan¬ 
ion! If only there had been the distance of the east 
and west between you and I! You were such a dis¬ 
graceful companion!” 

@ Allah will say to the disbelievers on the Day of 
Judgement, “After you have oppressed yourselves 
by ascribing partners to Me and committing sins, 
your sharing the punishment will not benefit you in 
the slightest today, despite you accompanying each 
other in disbelief and committing sins in the world.” 

@ Indeed, these people are deaf from hearing the truth and blind from seeing. O Messenger! Are you then capable of 
making the deaf hear, guiding the blind, or guiding the one clearly astray from the straight path? 

@ If I was to take you away by causing you to die before I punish them, I would be taking retribution from them by 
punishing them in the world and the Hereafter. 

@ Or if I was to show you some of the punishment I have prepared for them; indeed, I possess the capability over them 
and they cannot overpower me in the slightest. 

(Sjj) So O Messenger! Hold fast to whatever your Lord has revealed to you and practice it; you are upon the path of truth 
in which there is no uncertainty. 

@ And indeed, this Qur’an is an honour for you and your nation. You shall soon be questioned on the Day of Judgement 
regarding bringing faith in it, following its guidance and calling towards it. 

@ O Messenger! Ask those messengers I sent before you: “Did Allah make deities that were to be worshipped instead 
of the Merciful?” 

@ Verily, I sent Moses with My signs to Pharaoh and the leaders from his people. He said to them, “Indeed, I am the 
Messenger of the Lord of all creation.” 

@ Then when he brought My signs to them, they began to laugh at them, mockingly. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Turning away from the Qur’an is dangerous. 

2. It is obligatory to hold fast to the revelation that was revealed upon the Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him). 

3. The Qur’an is an honour for the Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him) and his nation. 

4. All the divine messages from Allah coincided in rejecting ascribing partners with Allah. 

5. Mocking the truth is a trait from the traits of disbelief. 


Sffi| Al-Zukhruf 492 


Part 25 



















\A>^_ 


(@> I showed Pharaoh and his leaders proof after 
proof to establish the authenticity of Moses’ mes¬ 
sage, each proof was greater in magnitude than the 
previous one. I seized them with the punishment in 
the world, in the hope that they turn away from the 
disbelief they were in, but to no avail. 

So when some of the punishment came upon 
them, they said to Moses (peace be upon him), “O 
sorcerer! Pray to your Lord for us asking Him to 
remove this punishment just as He said He would 
if we believed. If it is removed from us, we will be 
guided to the truth.” 

Then, when I removed the punishment from 
them, they began breaking their covenant and not 
fulfilling it. 

(jp Pharaoh called out among his people, bragging 
about his kingdom, “O my people! Do I not own the 
country of Egypt, and these rivers that flow beneath 
my palaces? Do you not see my kingdom and rec¬ 
ognise my greatness?” 

(S§p “Therefore, I am better than the weak, runaway 
Moses who cannot even speak well.” 

{fp “Why did Allah who sent him not throw down 
golden bracelets on him so that it becomes clear 
that he is His Messenger, or why did the angels not 
come with him, following one another?” 

@ So Pharaoh duped his people and they followed 
him in deviance. Indeed, they were a nation that 
came away from the obedience of Allah. 

(jj) Then, when they angered Me by continuing 
upon disbelief, I took retribution from them and 
drowned them all. 

@ So I made Pharaoh and his people an example 
for those who did actions like theirs, that they would perish just like they did. I also made them a lesson for those who 
take heed; so that they do not do the same actions as theirs and are then afflicted with whatever came upon them. 

{jp When the idolaters thought that the Jesus the Christians worshipped was included in the statement of Allah the Ex¬ 
alted: {Indeed, you [disbelievers] and what you worship other than Allah are the firewood of Hell. You will be coming 
to [enter] it}, and Allah had prohibited worshipping him just like He had prohibited the worship of idols, your people, O 
Messenger, began persisting in argument, saying, “We are pleased that our idols are of the same status as Jesus.” So Allah 
revealed, refuting them, {Indeed, those for whom the best [reward] has preceded from Me - they are from it far removed}. 
(j§) And they say, “Are our deities better or is Jesus better?” Ibn Al-Ziba‘ra and others did not draw up this comparison in 
love of hope in reaching the truth, rather in love of argumentation. They are a nation quarrelsome in nature. 

@ Jesus, the son of Mary is nothing but a servant from the servants of Allah whom He favoured with messengership and 
made him an example for the Israelites. They can use him as proof of the power of Allah because He created him without 
a father, just like He created Adam without parents. 

(S§p O children of Adam! If I wish to destroy you and make the angels succeed you on earth in your place, they would 
worship Me and not ascribe partners with me at all. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Breaking covenants is from the traits of the disbelievers. 

2. The wrongdoer is dim-witted; whoever wants to lead him astray can do so. 

3. Earning the anger of Allah will inevitably result in loss. 

4. The people of deviance strive to distort the meanings of Qur’anic text to suit their desires. 


Sjj 

Ijy ( &) 




03 ^ 


Al-Zukhruf 


493 


Part 25 


















^\j^jL*± /<£\j | 

<J\-£®J-i-P j>2 jJ^ij 0j^j2^ 

*U^==^X ^CJ^r JS 5 \S ^£^2^3^ 

(j^LsJ^\3 ^ j>2 jyh^5 

£5 j ^_55 5\0 

ti)\^\3\Sl1^22jj2^ j-* 0 

'0&g $\ o 

e3p^ ^ll2*b 0 ^S/vbii^ SI Lj jl^L-so 

U^bl2^\ J^Vc- 0 Ojpj^Jli^Slj Sx^ 

$&l 3 J& sbb^io\ 0 

j^3j U 435 

dfe30 j^>- 

00^1^=^121^5 


@ Indeed, Jesus is a sign from the major signs of 
the Hour, when he shall descend towards the end 
of time. So do not doubt the Hour’s occurrence and 
follow me in whatever I have brought to you from 
Allah. This thing I have brought is the straight path 
in which there is no deviance. 

@ And let Satan not turn you away from the 
straight path through his lure and deception. In¬ 
deed, he is an enemy whose enmity is clear. 

@ After Jesus (peace be upon him) brought clear 
signs of his messengership to his people, he said 
to them, “I have brought wisdom to you from Al¬ 
lah so that I can make clear to you some matters of 
your religion you differ in. So be mindful of Allah 
by fulfilling His commands and refrain from that 
which He has prohibited, and obey me in whatever 
I command you with and prohibit you from.” 

<3jS “Indeed, Allah is my Lord and your Lord; we 
have no Lord other than Him, so devote your wor¬ 
ship to Him alone. This monotheism that I call you 
towards and devotion of worship to Allah is the 
straight path in which there is no deviance.” 

@ Then, groups of the Christians disagreed in re¬ 
gards to Jesus. Some of them say, “He is a Allah”, 
and some say, “He is the son of Allah”, and others 
say, “He and his mother are both Allahs”, so woe 
be to those who oppress themselves by attributing 
Allahhood to Jesus, or sonship, or saying that he is 
one of the Trinity! Woe be to them from a painful „ 
punishment that awaits them on the Day of Judge¬ 
ment. 

{§} These disputing parties in regards to Jesus await 
nothing except the Hour which will come to them 
suddenly, whilst they do not even perceive its arrival. If it comes to them whilst they are upon disbelief, then their abode 
is a painful torment. 

{§} Those who befriend each other upon disbelief and deviance will be enemies to one another on the Day of Judgement, 
except for those who are mindful of Allah by fulfilling His commands and refrain from that which He has prohibited. 
Their friendship is everlasting and will not break. 

Allah will say to them: “O My servants! There is no fear upon you today in what you will face, nor will you grieve 
over what you lost out on from the good of the world.” 

{§} “Those who believed in the Qur’an that was revealed upon their Messenger and were submissive to it, fulfilling its 
commands and refraining from things He did not allow.” 

@ “Enter Paradise; you and your equals in faith. You will be pleased with the everlasting blessings you will encounter, 
which shall not finish nor expire.” 

@ Their servants will roam among them with golden plates and handleless cups. In Paradise there is whatever the hearts 
desire and the eyes are delighted with seeing. You will reside in it eternally. 

@ That Paradise I have described for you is the one I have made you inherit because of your deeds, through My grace, 
(jp There are many fruits in it for you which shall never finish, from which you can eat. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The descension of Jesus is one of the major signs of the Hour. 

2. Satan is an enemy of the children of Adam. 

3. The friendship of the wrongdoers will break on the Day of Judgement, whilst the friendship of the Allah-conscious 
will remain forever. 


Al-Zukhruf 


494 


Part 25 

















After Allah mentions the reward of the Mindful, He 
then mentions the requital of their opposites: the 
criminals. He says: 

3 Indeed, the criminals who commit disbelief and 
sins will be in the punishment of hell on the Day of 
Judgement, wherein they shall remain forever. 

3 The punishment will not be lessened for them. 
They will lose all hope in the mercy of Allah in it. 
3 I will not oppress them by entering them into 
the hellfire, rather they oppressed themselves by 
disbelieving. 

3 They will call out to Malik, the gatekeeper of 
the hellfire, saying: “O Malik! Our Lord should 
make us die so that we are relieved of this punish¬ 
ment!” Malik will answer them saying, “You are to 
remain forever in the punishment. You will not die, 
nor will the punishment stop from you.” 

3 Indeed, I brought the undisputed truth to you in 
the world, but the majority of you disliked the truth. 
3 So, if they plot against the Prophet (peace be 
upon him) and hatch an evil plan against him, I will 
indeed, hatch a plan against them which will be 
greater than theirs. 

3 Or, do they think that I do not hear their secrets 
that they hide within their hearts, or those that they 
whisper to one another? Nay! I hear them all, and 
the angels with them write everything they do. 

3 O Messenger! Say to those who attribute daugh¬ 
ters to Allah, who is exalted greatly from their state¬ 
ment: “If, hypothetically, Allah had a child, then I 
would be the first to worship that child.” 

<3 The Lord of the heavens, the earth and the 
Throne is pure of the statements of attributing part¬ 


ners, wives and children of these idolaters. 

3 So O Messenger! Leave them to continue in whatever falsehood they are engrossed in, and let them enjoy until they 
meet the day which they have been promised. They will soon know the outcome of their actions and regret it. 

3 He (may He be glorified) is the true deity in the heavens and the true deity on earth. And He is the Wise in His creation, 
decree and management, and Knower of the conditions of His servants. None of them are hidden from Him. 

3 Allah’s goodness and blessings continue to increase - (may He be glorified). To Him alone belongs the kingdom of the 
heavens and the earth and whatever lies between them. And with Him alone is the knowledge of the Hour in which the 
Day of Judgement will occur; no one else knows it. And to Him alone will you all return in the afterlife for accountability 
and requital. 

3 Those deities that the idolaters worship instead of Allah are not able to intercede in front of Allah, except those that 
testify that there is none worthy of worship except Allah whilst understanding their testimony, i.e. Jesus, Ezra and the 
angels. 

3 And if you ask them, “Who created you?” they would definitely say, “Allah created us”, so how can they then turn 
away from His worship after this acknowledgement? 

3 With Allah (may He be glorified) is the knowledge of the complaint of His Messenger when they rejected him, and 
his statement regarding them: “O my Lord! Indeed, these people are a nation that does not believe in what you sent me 
to take to them.” 

3 So ignore them, and say to them whatever repels their evil - this was in Makkah - they will soon realise what punish¬ 
ment they will face. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The disbelievers will lose hope of ever coming out of the hellfire. 

2. Disliking the truth is very dangerous. 

3. The plots of the disbelievers turn on them, even if it be after a while. 

4. The knowledge of the hour is exclusive to Allah. 

5. The oneness in Lordship necessitates oneness in Allahhood. 
















*W>£> 0 ly^^Ir* lx.^salj^j^ 
T^i^Uj oflS^ \j OJ^C cl>J 0J^^^-7tr^ 

j ? h 5 <£^43 1^0 0 cj^y>^== ol 

(£) 5fi4-^4^^ p-* <3^ 0 ^^oi^\c ojj 

^juo (^j cA-^oq i\^_iii\ ^\j 

%6^i^ci4i==\(5 0jL$4>fe&* 


^JJ 
^ & 

s. 


The Smoke (Surah Al-Dukhan) 

® Themes of the Surah: 

Emphasis on warning of the awaiting punishment, 
through threatening the rejectors of the punishment 
of the world and the Hereafter. 

^Explanation: 

© Ha MTm. The discussion on similar letters has 
already passed in Surah Al-Baqarah. 

© Allah takes an oath on the Qur’an which clearly 
explains the path of guidance towards the truth. 

© Indeed, I revealed the Qur’an on the Night of 
Decree; it is a night of much goodness. Indeed, I 
warn through this Qur’an. 

© On this night every precise matter related to pro¬ 
visions, lifespans etc. are decided which Allah is to 
make happen that year. 

© I decide every precise matter of Mine; indeed, I 
am the one who sends the messengers. 

© O Messenger! I send the messengers through 
My mercy for those whom they are sent towards. 

Indeed, may I be glorified I am the Hearer of the 
statements of My servants, the Knower of their in¬ 
tentions; none of them are hidden from Me. 

© He is the Lord of the heavens, the earth and 
whatever lies between them. If you are convinced 
of that, then bring faith upon my Messenger. 

© There is no true deity except him. He gives life 
and causes death; there is no one that does that ex¬ 
cept Him. He is your Lord and the Lord of your 
forefathers before you. 

© These idolaters are not convinced of that, rather, 
they are in doubt about it and distract themselves 
from it with the falsehood they are in. 

@ So O Messenger! Wait for their punishment that will come soon: a day when the sky is clearly filled with smoke. 

@ It will cover the people, and will be said to them, “This punishment that has afflicted you is a painful punishment.” 
Cp They will then beg their Lord, asking him, “O our Lord! Turn the punishment that you sent upon us, away from us. If 
you turn it away from us, we will believe in You and in Your Messenger.” 

@ How can they take heed and repent to their Lord now, when a clear Messenger came to them before, and they knew 
of his truthfulness and honesty? 

© They turned away from believing in him, and said about him, “He was taught. Other people taught him; he is not a 
messenger.” They also said, “He is a madman.” 

C§| Indeed, when I turn the punishment away from them for a short while, they will return to their disbelief and rejection. 
© O Messenger! Wait for the day when I will seize the disbelievers with the greatest seizing, by entering them into the 
hellfire on the Day of Judgement wherein they will live forever. I will take retribution from them for their disbelief in 
Allah and rejecting His messengers. 

© And verily I tested the people of Pharaoh before them, and their noble messenger came to them from Allah calling 
them towards His oneness and worship. He was Moses (peace be upon him). 

© Moses said to Pharaoh and his people, “Leave the Israelites to me, because they are the servants of Allah; you have 
no right to take them as slaves. Indeed, I am a messenger to you from Allah, I am trustworthy in conveying what He has 
commanded me to convey. I will not take anything away from it nor add anything to it.” 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The initial revelation of the noble Qur’an upon the Prophet was on the Night of Decree. 

2. The Night of Decree is in the month of Ramadan. 

3. The teachings of the Prophets free the weak from the grasp of tyrants. 






Al-Dukhan 


496 


Part 25 






























I J^Qje^U 



O Jxlq (^) /_ A*J> Ol^ ^ /Jp^a^O^j £)\j 

>^== (j£) j^pI? (^) i^y*-*^* I 

j£iS ($L^^a« 3 ^fl)3 ($)o^5 c^-o^l^ 5 
L^(^f -^ 31 ^ W^tli 5 ^ 

-X 3 V 3 ($) V^> ^Ca 3 15 ^V^lJ\ 

^a) ^ ^ ">^J _ ^ 

A^J ($) O^Q,^ O^ 


>> 


j^ck tj* c$)j 

Cl l*j2AoLa_9 <Jr*L^)j C^£*J^ \ L^j^-Laj ( fy 

^y^==J\ ^£o3j 

Al-Dukhan 


497 


Part 25 


@ “And do not show arrogance to Allah by leav¬ 
ing His worship and assuming superiority over His 
servants. Indeed, I will bring to you a clear proof.” 
(jp “And I have sought protection in my Lord and 
your Lord from you killing me by stoning.” 

@ “If you do not believe in whatever I have 
brought, then leave me alone; do not approach me 
intending harm.” 

(jp Then Moses supplicated to his Lord: “This na¬ 
tion i.e. Pharaoh and his people, are a criminal na¬ 
tion who deserve a swift punishment.” 

@ So Allah commanded Moses to take his people 
away at night, and informed him that Pharaoh and 
his people will pursue them. 

@ He also commanded him that when they all 
cross the sea, to leave it standing as it was, because 
Pharaoh and his people were to be destroyed by 
drowning in it. 

dj| How many gardens and flowing springs did 
Pharaoh and his people leave behind! 

J§S> And how many farms and beautiful places did 
they leave behind! 

(jp And how many lives of luxuries they used to 
live, did they leave behind! 

(Sjp Whatever has been described to you happened 
to them, and we made another nation i.e. the Israel¬ 
ites inherit their gardens, springs, farms and struc¬ 
tures. 

(Sjp Neither the heavens nor the earth cried over 
Pharaoh and his people when they drowned, nor 
were they given respite to repent. 

@ And verily I saved the Israelites from the humil¬ 
iating punishment, because Pharaoh and his people 


would kill their children and keep their women alive. 

{§p I saved them from the punishment of Pharaoh. Indeed, he was an arrogant one from those who transgressed the com¬ 
mand and religion of Allah. 

© And verily I selected the Israelites knowingly over the people of their time, because of their many Prophets. 

@) And I granted them miracles through which I gave strength to Moses, and in which there was an obvious blessing for 
them, like the Mann and Salwa and other than them. 

A Indeed, these rejecting idolaters will say, denying the resurrection: 

jjj) “It is only our first death that we will die; there is no life after that, and we are not going to be resurrected after this 
death.” 

{§} “O Muhammad! If you are truthful in your claim that Allah will resurrect the dead alive for requital and accountability, 
then bring back to life our forefathers who have died.” 

@ O Messenger! Are these denying idolaters stronger and more resistant, or the people of Tubba‘ and those after them 
like the ‘Ad and Thamud? I destroyed them all. Indeed, they were criminals. 

(jp And I did not create the heavens, the earth and everything between it in jest and amusement. 

@) I only created it due to a profound wisdom, but the majority of idolaters do not know that. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. It is obligatory for a believer to seek refuge in his Lord to protect him from the plots of his enemies. 

2. Supplicating against the disbelievers is legislated when they do not accept the call and fight the callers. 

3. The universe does not grieve over the death of a disbeliever because of his insignificance to Allah. 

4. The creation of the heavens and the earth is due to a profound wisdom which the heretics are ignorant of. 




















S-y^^y~cA 


'h\ 


^ ^ J 

-^Jsy^L 


ij\&£ 




■\Ji K 


^L^La\-XlZb 1* s\ ( ffi ) jL^s^=S=dWj/v-^ \ l^Jj \ 
o^r l| ($) ££^ 6^0 


i) O^AX-ij 


($) <iiV-X^=3 

Si \ (^) j<jV^a\» A £^ 9 


@ The day of judgment in which Allah will decide 
between the servants is the appointed time for all of 
the creation in which Allah will gather them. 

@ The day when no relative will benefit his rel¬ 
ative or friend benefit his friend nor will they be 
saved from Allah’s punishment, because authority 
on that day will be for Allah. Nobody will be able 
to claim it. 

|jj) Except the person Allah has mercy on, for he 
will benefit from the good action he has sent for¬ 
ward. Allah is the Mighty whom nobody can over¬ 
power, Wise in His creation, decree and plan. 

After Allah mentioned the Day of Judgment, He 
mentioned how people will be separated according 
to the reward, and so He said: 

@ The tree of zaqqum which Allah has grown at 
the bottom of the fire 

@ Is the food of the extremely sinful who will eat 
of its horrible fruit! 

{J} Like black oil, boiling in their stomachs due to 
its intense heat. 

Cj) Like the boiling of extremely hot water. 

@ It will be said to the keepers of hell: “Grab him, 
drag him violently and harshly towards the middle 
of the fire”. 

@ Then pour hot water over the head of this person 
being punished, so that the punishment does not 
separate from him. 

(Sjp It will be said to him, mockingly: “Taste this 
painful punishment. You are the mighty who is not 
treated unjustly, noble amongst your people. 

{§} This is the punishment you used to doubt will 
occur on the Day of Judgment, but now your doubt 
has been removed from you by seeing it”. 

@ Those who are mindful of their Lord through carrying out His commands and refraining from His prohibitions will be 
in a place of residence, safe from every misfortune that could afflict them. 

Cp In gardens and flowing springs. 

J They will wear in Paradise fine and thick silk. They will be facing one another and not see each other’s nape. 

(jp Just as I will honour with that which is mentioned, I will marry them in Paradise to beautiful women with beautiful 
wide eyes. 

They will call their attendants therein to bring them every fruit they wish, safe from their being cut off and from their 
harms. 

(Jj§|) Living therein forever. They will not taste death therein except the first death in the worldly life, and their Lord will 
save them from the punishment of the fire. 

@ As a grace and kindness from your Lord to them, O Messenger. That which is mentioned, namely entering them into 
Paradise and saving them from the fire is the great success which no success can compare with. 

(jp I have made this Qur’an easy and facilitated it for you by revealing it in your language of Arabic, O Messenger, so 
that they take heed. 

So await your help and their destruction; they are awaiting your destruction. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The punishment in the afterlife, for the disbeliever, will be both physical and mental. 

2. The pleasure in the afterlife, for the believer, will be both physical and mental. 

3. The great success is salvation from the fire and entering Paradise. 


—£-\sVm« \j {^) 

























I Lr' LL a 






S 99 



l±£ J^ 7,i 


The Kneeling (Surah Al-Jathiyah) 

^ Topic of the Surah: 

It focuses on curing those arrogant to the truth of 
desires, through presenting signs and reminding 
them of the Hereafter. 

® Explanation: 

(JfJ Ha Mlm. The discussion on similar letters has 
already passed in Surah Al-Baqarah. 

@ The revelation of the Qur’an is from Allah, the 
Mighty whom nobody can overpower, Wise in His 
creating, decreeing and planning. 

CfJ In the heavens and earth are proof of the power 
of Allah and His oneness for the believers, because 
they are the ones who take heed from signs. 

And in your creation, O people, from a sperm- 
drop, then from a lump, and then from a clot, and 
in the creation of the creatures Allah has spread out 
on the face of this earth are proof of His oneness, 
for people who have conviction that it is Allah who 
is the Creator. 

@ And in the alteration of the night and day, and 
the rainwater Allah sent down from the sky, then He 
gave life to the earth through it by making plants 
grow in it after it was dead without any plants, and 
in the alteration of the winds by bringing them from 
one direction at times and other directions at oth¬ 
er times for your benefit, are proof for people who 
understand. So they use them as proof of Allah’s 
oneness, His power to resurrect and His power over 
everything. 

These verses and proof I read to you in truth, O 
Messenger. So if they do not believe in the speech 
of Allah which He revealed to His servant and in His proof, which speech will they believe in after it and which proof 
after it will they accept? 

jj} Allah’s punishment and destruction is for every liar who is extremely sinful. 

{J) This disbeliever listens to the verses of Allah in the Qur’an being recited to him, then he continues in the disbelief 
and sins he is in, arrogant in himself to following the truth, as though he has not heard these verses being read to him. So 
inform him, O Messenger, of what he will dislike in the Hereafter, which is a painful punishment that awaits him there. 
(0) And when something of the Qur’an reaches him, he takes it as a joke to mock. Those attributed with this quality of 
mocking the Qur’an will have a disgraceful punishment on the day of judgment. 

{j) In front of them will be the fire of hell which awaits them in the Hereafter, and the actions they earned will not help 
them with Allah at all nor will the idols they took to worship besides Him remove anything from them. And they will have 
a great punishment on the day of judgment. 

@ This book which I revealed to My Messenger Muhammad is a guide to the true path. And those who disbelieve in the 
verses of their Lord which were revealed to His Messenger will have a bad, painful punishment. 

@ Allah alone is the one who subjugated for you, O people, the sea in which ships sail with His order, and so that you 
seek His grace through different lawful trades and so that you are thankful for Allah’s favours upon you. 

@ And He subjugated whatever is in the heavens such as the sun, moon and stars, and whatever is on earth such as rivers, 
trees, mountains and so forth. In subjugating that for you are proof of Allah’s power and His oneness for people who 
ponder over His signs and take heed from them. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Lying and persistently sinning, being proud and mocking Allah’s words, are qualities of misguided people, and Allah 
has threatened the person attributed with these. 2. Allah’s favours upon His servants are many, and amongst them are 
Allah’s subjugating what is in the universe for them. 

3. Favours require the servants to be grateful to the Allah who has granted them. 


e£3\ 

JobCJ j Jo>-(^13oij)£-i*goliaib 

cJj) 

L^Js-P ^ 

cjt 0 o 


Al-Jathiyah 499 


Part 25 























Sj 


0 • * 




iL^isU>th^ 0 

U-1j^ a2j 0 31 ^ i^iii^ ^LSj\ 3^-? 

(5* >4^p'?3 0 3}-^ 

3ij; 6U4^o Oo jjj \ xle-t* jjo 3*Sl ^ 



@ O Messenger, say to those who brought faith in 
Allah and accepted His messengers: “Forgive those 
who did bad to you from the disbelievers who do 
not hope for Allah’s reward nor do they fear His 
punishment, because Allah will reward both the 
patient believers and the transgressing disbelievers 
for the actions they used to earn in this world”. 

<§} Whoever does good actions, the result of his 
good action is for him, And Allah is in no need of 
his actions. And whoever does bad, the result of his 
bad action is that he will be punished for it; Allah 
is not harmed by his bad. Then to Me alone you 
will be returned so I can reward everyone with what 
they deserve. 

@ I granted the Israelites the Torah and deciding 
between people according to its rule, and I made 
most of the prophets amongst them from the chil¬ 
dren of Abraham (peace be upon him), and I pro¬ 
vided them with different types of good things and 
I granted them virtue over the worlds in their era. 
@ And I gave them proof which clarify truth from 
falsehood. But they did not differ except after the 
proof were established against them by sending 
My Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him). And 
nothing lead them to this difference except some of 
them oppressing others, out of greed for leadership 
and fame. O Messenger, your Lord will decide be¬ 
tween them on the day of judgment what they used 
to differ about in the world, so He will clearly show 
who was right and who was wrong. 

(jj) O Messenger, then I put you on an ordained way 
regarding the matter of Islam and which calls them 
to faith and good actions. So follow this way and do 


Al-Jathiyah 

not follow the desires of those who do not know the truth, and so their desires lead them away from the truth. 

@ Those who do not know the truth will not be able to hold back Allah’s punishment from you if you follow their desires. 
And the oppressors from all sects and creeds help and support one another against the believers. And Allah is the helper 
of those mindful of Him by carrying out His commands and refraining from His prohibitions. 

(Sjl This Qur’an which is revealed to My Messenger is enlightenment through which people can see truth from falsehood, 
guidance to the truth, and mercy for people who have conviction, because they are the ones who are guided through it to 
the straight path, so that their Lord is pleased with them and He then enters them into Paradise and distances them from 
the fire. 

@ Those who commit disbelief and sins through their limbs think I will make them in reward like those who brought 
faith in Allah and did good deeds, making them equal in this life and the Hereafter. Wretched is this judgment of theirs. 
@ And Allah created the heavens and earth with complete wisdom and He did not create it in vain, and so that each soul 
can be rewarded with the good or bad it earned. Allah will not oppress them by decreasing their good deeds or increasing 
their bad deeds. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Pardoning and forgiving the oppressor when he does not cause corruption on earth and transgress the limits of Allah is 
an excellent characteristic which Allah ordered the believers with if they are optimistic of a good outcome. 

2. The necessity of following the sacred law and staying far from following the desires of people. 

3. Just as believers and disbelievers are not equal in qualities, likewise they are not equal in reward. 

4. Allah’s creating the heavens is in accordance with complete wisdom which materialistic atheists are unaware of. 





















| AjAj-L aJj-A 


0 • 




lt>^ 5 &$>!? 4 y*^ ^ o^ <^i£^ 

^y*r r& <? y P <?y ^ y'^' •** , y'y '''•*' yy y ’ 9 ‘^" 

^3) 4j±\ Xj^ m CJC ^5^3 

>p€i\x&^\^^ 6j05iS: 

ipi» oL^cxidtoj ^c«3J>ji\ ^ 
ofsju^^'s ^ 5 ®;^Sp 

JC^; ^ ji 0 yyyy^£ 

liiii^Jl^lOyAjO^ Ot^^> 

(j^) 'kcXj!^ \ ^cJgj ^.9 V9 ' 

iyyy£- \ 'b^ ^ 



1C? 


(SJ) O Messenger, look at the one who followed his 
desires and made it like his Allah he cannot oppose, 
then Allah led him astray despite his knowledge, 
because he deserved to be misguided, and Allah 
sealed his heart so he cannot listen in a manner that 
benefits, and Allah put a veil on his eyes which 
stops him from seeing the truth. So who can enable 
him to the truth after Allah has led him astray? Do 
you not remember the harm of following desires 
and the benefit of following Allah’s sacred law? 
(jp And the disbelievers who denied the resurrec¬ 
tion said: “There is no life besides this worldly life 
of ours, so there is no life after it. Generations die 
never to return and other generations come to life. 
And only the alteration of the night and day is what 
makes us die”. They have no knowledge for their 
denial of the resurrection. They are only assuming, 
and assumptions are of no benefit to the truth. 

@ When you recite My clear verses to the idola¬ 
ters who deny the resurrection, they have no proof 
which they can use except their saying to the Mes¬ 
senger (peace be upon him) and his Companions: 
“Bring our dead fathers back to life if you are true 
in your claim that we will be resurrected after our 
death”. 

(j| O Messenger, say to them: “Allah gives you life 
by creating you from a sperm-drop, then He will 
give you death, then He will gather you after your 
death on the day of judgment for reckoning and re¬ 
ward. That day in whose coming there is no doubt”. 
But most people do not know and so they do not 
prepare for it with good actions. 

(jp And to Allah alone belongs the kingdom of the 
heavens and the kingdom of earth, so there is nobody to be truly worshipped in them besides Him. And on the day the 
Hour occurs in which Allah will raise the dead for reckoning and reward, the people of falsehood who used to worship 
others besides Allah, strive to refute the truth and establish falsehood, will lose. 

(jjS) And you will see on that day, O Messenger, every nation crouching on its knees, awaiting what will be done with them. 
Every nation will be called towards its book of deeds which the guarding angels wrote. Today, you will be rewarded, O 
people, for the good and bad you used to do in the world. 

@) This is My book, in which My angels used to write your actions, which is speaking against you truthfully, so read it. 
I used to order the guarding angels to write what you used to do in the world. 

@ As for those who brought faith and did good actions, their Lord will enter them into Paradise through His mercy. That 
reward which Allah granted them is the clear success which no success can compare with. 

@ As for those who disbelieved in Allah, it will be said to them to rebuke them: “Were My verses not recited to you, but 
you were too proud to bring faith in them, and you were a transgressing people, earning disbelief and sins?” 

@ When it is said to you: “Allah’s promise, in which He has promised His servants He will resurrect them and reward 
them, is true without doubt, and the Hour is true without doubt, so work for it”, you say: “We do not know what this Hour 
is. We only assume doubtfully that it is coming and we are not convinced it will come”. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Following desires destroys the one who does so. 

2. Assuming does not benefit the truth at all, especially in the matter of belief. 


I $3 0 

\j 3 >- 43 ^ J&j oicVd'' 

{^) £SS>! \.{j& 0! \ Via (£j Jo\ja 


Al-Jathiyah 


501 


Part 25 




















o • Y 




> 9 . 


j C->WJLu>\ Jq_^ 

J J3^i> <x\ cJ^fl^'S^ JjS\j J>i£ t* 


AJ 


"J 


OJ^^-^4^0 

~i k^&j &&. : J£R% 


jj 



»•&» 

4iM 



@ And the evil consequences of the disbelief and 
sins they committed in the world will appear to 
them, and the punishment which they used to mock 
when warned of it will befall them. 

(jp Allah will say to them: “Today, I will leave you 
in the fire just as you forgot meeting this day of 
yours, and so did not prepare for it through faith 
and good actions. And your abode which you will 
take refuge in is the fire. And you do not have any 
helpers to repel Allah’s punishment from you. 

{§} That punishment you are being punished with 
is because you took the words of Allah as a joke 
which you would mock, and life with its pleasures 
and desires deceived you”. So today these disbe¬ 
lievers who used to mock Allah’s words will not be 
taken out of the fire, but rather they will remain in 
it forever, and neither will they be returned to the 
worldly life to do good deeds nor will their Lord be 
pleased with them. 

@ So for Allah alone is praise, Lord of the heavens 
and Lord of the earth, and Lord of all the creation. 

And for Him is grandeur and greatness in the 
heavens and the earth, and He is the Mighty whom 
nobody can overpower, Wise in His creating, de¬ 
creeing and planning. 

The Sand Dunes (Surah Al-Ahqaf) 

® Topic of the Surah: 

It focuses on establishing the proof against the 
deniers and warning them of punishment, and for 
that reason, the word warning has been repeated in 
there. 

® Explanation: 

0) Ha Mlm. The discussion on similar letters has already passed in Surah Al-Baqarah. 

(Sj) The revelation of the Qur’an is from Allah, the Mighty whom nobody can overpower, Wise in His creating, decreeing 
and planning. 

(SjS I did not create the heavens and the earth and I did not create what is between them in vain, but rather I created all of 
it with truth and with complete wisdom. Amongst that is for His servants to recognise Him through them and so worship 
Him alone and not associate any partner with Him, and so that they fulfil the demands of their being made deputy on earth 
until a fixed time which Allah alone knows. And those who disbelieve in Allah are turning away from the Book of Allah 
they are being warned through, without paying attention to it. 

@ O Messenger! Say to these idolaters who turn away from the truth: “Tell me about your idols you worship besides 
Allah: what parts of the earth have they created? Have they created a mountain? Have they created a river? Or do they 
have partnership and a share with Allah in creating the heavens? Bring me a book revealed from Allah before the Qur’an 
or some trace of knowledge which the previous people left, if you are true in your claim that your idols deserve to be 
worshipped”. 

Cjj) And there is nobody more misguided than the one who worships an idol besides Allah which cannot respond to his 
call until the day of judgment. And these idols which they worship besides Allah are unaware of their slaves calling upon 
them, because they are inanimate and cannot hear, see or understand. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Mocking the verses of Allah is disbelief. 

2. The danger of being deceived by the pleasures and desires of the world. 

3. Allah is the supremely Great. 





ijr* ^ lirti Q ' 























0 



c£jo\jj Qtjdfeffi 

ojB^/^g i$%^zjjzf\0c*g^ 

(J^-? \ -Cj-^2* 1 Aj 4j^ 

^5^jo^i==ujs Oj^L^^jI^j 
GUj \,£$ &\J^SJ c5j 3\ Uj 

jaSp^J 



j \jjs^===z(jjk \ j\I_3 (^ 0^5^^ 


^Ajj. 






© And alongside not benefiting them in the world, 
when they are raised on the Day of Judgment, they 
will be enemies to those who used to worship them 
and disassociate themselves from them, and they 
will deny having any knowledge of their worship¬ 
ping them. 

@ And when My verses which are revealed to My 
Messenger are read to them, the disbelievers say 
regarding the Qur’an when it came to them at the 
hands of their Messenger: “This is clear magic. It is 
not revelation from Allah”. 

@ Do these idolaters say: “Muhammad has made 
up this Qur’an and attributed it to Allah?” Say to 
them, O Messenger: “If I have made it up on my 
own part, you do not have power over any plan for 
me if Allah wants to punish me, so how can I put 
^ myself at risk of punishment by fabricating against 
Him? Allah knows better the criticism of His 
Qur’an and slandering me you engage in. He, (may 
He be glorified), is sufficient as a witness between 
me and you. And He is Forgiving of the sins of His 
servants who repent to Him, Merciful to them”. 
@ O Messenger! Say to these idolaters who reject 
your prophethood: “I am not the first Messenger 
Allah has sent, as many messengers came before 
me. I do not know what Allah will do with me nor 
what He will do with you in this life. I only follow 
what Allah reveals to me, so I do not say or do ex¬ 
cept according to what He reveals. And I am only a 
wamer who clearly warns of His punishment”. 

@ O Messenger, say to these deniers: “Tell me if 
this Qur’an is from Allah and you deny it, and a 
witness from the Israelites testifies that it is from 


Al-Ahqaf 

Allah, relying on what has come regarding it in the Torah and then he brings faith in it, whilst you scorn bringing faith in 
it, will you not then be oppressors? Allah does not enable the oppressors to the truth”. 

@ And those who denied the Qur’an and what their Messenger brought to them say: “If what Muhammad brought was 
true and guides towards good, these paupers, servants and weak people would not have preceded us towards it”. And 
because they are not guided to what their Messenger brought them, they will say: “This which he has brought us is an old 
lie, and we do not follow lies”. 

@ And before this Qur’an is the Torah, the book which Allah revealed on Moses (peace be upon him) as a leader to be 
followed in the truth and as a mercy for those who believe in it and follow it amongst the Israelites. And this Qur’an 
which has been revealed upon Muhammad (peace be upon him) is a book which confirms the books before it, in the 
Arabic language, so that he can warn through it those who wronged themselves through associating partners with Allah 
and by committing sins, and it is a glad tiding to the good-doers who made their relationship with their Creator and their 
relationship with His creation good. 

@ Indeed, those who say, “Our Lord is Allah; we have no Lord besides Him”, then they become firm on faith and good 
actions, there will be no fear on them in what they face in the Hereafter, nor will they grieve over the fortune of this 
worlds which escaped them or what they left behind them. 

@ Those who are attributed with those qualities are the people of Paradise who will live in it forever, as a reward for them 
for their good deeds that they sent forward in the world. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Everyone who is worshipped besides Allah will refute the disbelievers who worshipped them. 

2. The Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him) is not the first of the messengers, but rather the last of them. 

3. The Prophet (peace be upon him) not having knowledge of the Ghaib, except what Allah informs him of from it. 

4. The presence of that which establishes the prophethood of our Prophet (peace be upon him) in the previous books. 

5. Explaining the virtue of steadfastness and the reward for those who practice it. 


I . c o 5 x ^ j . 

I ^ ^ J \ 






















lejjU |j 




& 


£^_jjlXJo\ <S^6aV!^^ 

cu^^cs? \ 6 ^ ^j^ 35 ^ ^-rD < 3 ^ oi*l^ 

J^ss £>u^ ot<Jb (ji 

CjF^>L3 ^ j -^>-\ j±-i£S-' 

^ ^ ^ J 't~°- ^ 

3^ t£$j 0 Oji^i^= eS J3 -^cj jjSU 

(j^ iL)£j&\ cJ^»--Xaj ^»-\ ^- 4 ^. 

J^^3 £> ijp - 6i4^ A43^ 0 4xkt* 




r> 


■sr. ke 


@ And I commanded man with emphasis that he 
should be kind to his parents and that he should be 
righteous towards them in their lifetime and after 
their death with what does not oppose the sacred 
law. And in particular his mother who carried him 
with difficulty and gave birth to him with difficulty. 
And the length of his gestation period in which he 
remained and the beginning of his weaning is thir¬ 
ty months. Until when he reaches the completion 
of his mental and physical strength, he says: “My 
Lord, inspire me to thank You for Your favour you 
have done to me and my parents, and inspire me to 
do good actions which please you, and accept them 
from me. And correct my children for me. I have 
repented to You from my sins and I am amongst 
those who submit to Your obedience and surrender 
to Your commands”. 

@ Those are the ones from whom I accept the good 
deeds they did and overlook their sins, so I do not 
seize them due to them. And they are amongst the 
people of Paradise. This promise they have been 
given is a true promise which will definitely occur. 
After Allah mentioned the example of one who is 
righteous to his parents, to encourage righteous¬ 
ness, He mentioned the example of one who diso¬ 
beys them, to discourage disobeying them. He said: 
@) And the one who said to his parents: “Woe unto 
you. Do you promise me that I will be taken out of 
my grave alive after I die, whereas many nations 
have passed in which people died, but none of them 
was raised alive?” And his parents are seeking help 
from Allah to guide their son towards faith, and 
they say to their son: “Woe unto you if you do not 


Al-Ahqaf 

bring faith on the resurrection, so bring faith in it. Allah’s promise of resurrection is true without doubt”. But he says, 
renewing his denial of the resurrection: “This which is said regarding the resurrection is nothing but something related 
from the books of the previous people and what they wrote. It is not proven from Allah”. 

(Sj| Those are the ones for whom punishment is established amongst the nations before them from the jinns and men. They 
were the losers, as they lost themselves and their children by entering the fire. 

@> And for each group - the group of Paradise and the group of the fire - are ranks according to their actions. The ranks 
of the people of Paradise are high ranks, whilst the ranks of the people of the fire are low ranks. And so that Allah gives 
them the full reward of their actions, and they will not be oppressed on the day of judgment by their good deeds being 
decreased or their bad deeds being increased. 

@) On the day when those who rejected Allah and His messengers will be exposed to the Fire to be punished in it, it will 
be said to them in rebuke: “You have finished your good things in your worldly life and you enjoyed the pleasures it con¬ 
tained. On this day, you will be rewarded with the punishment which will disgrace and shame you due to your arrogance 
on earth unjustly, and due to your leaving the obedience of Allah through disbelief and sins”. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Explaining the status of righteousness in Islam, especially with respect to the mother, and warning of disobedience. 

2. Explaining the danger of increasing in worldly pleasures, as they distract from the Afterlife. 

3. Explaining the severe warning for the people of pride and transgression. 


I ($) 


mij L . 























|4H cfe-Sij 'j jo\ j^L£- * 

LijIS ty \a (^) .^laP^ ^1 j[p 


,-i •» 


jy 


°3i> I 


i£<^ I 

* c> ] s y^yv^-* xaj t^j 

| b? d ^ 4 ] 1 


<03 


■>Ui 




@ O Messenger, remember Hud, the brother of 
Ad in lineage, when he warned his people of Al¬ 
lah’s punishment befalling them, when they were 
in their homes in Ahqaf in the south of the Arabian 
Peninsula, and messengers to warn their people had 
already passed before Hud and after him, saying to 
their people: “Do not worship anyone except Al¬ 
lah alone; do not worship anything besides Him. O 
people, I fear for you the punishment of a great day, 
which is the day of judgment”. 

{§) His people said to him: “Have you come to us 
to turn us away from worshipping our Allahs? That 
will never happen for you, so bring us the punish¬ 
ment you promise us if you are true in what you 
claim”. 

{§} He said: “The knowledge of the time for pun¬ 
ishment is only with Allah and I do not have any 
knowledge of it. I am only a messenger who con¬ 
veys to you what I have been sent with towards you. 
However, I see you as a people who are unaware of 
what contains benefit for you, so you leave it, and 
of what contains harm for you, so you commit it”. 

Then when the punishment they hastened for 
came to them, and they saw a cloud appearing in 
one direction of the sky, heading towards their val¬ 
leys, they said: “This is a cloud which will bring us 
rain”. Hud said to them: “The matter is not as you 
think, i.e., that it is a cloud which will rain upon 
you, but rather it is the punishment you hastened 
for. It is a wind which contains a painful punish¬ 
ment”. 

Destroying everything it passed by which Allah 
ordered to be destroyed, so they were destroyed, 
only their houses in which they lived being visible, bearing witness to their inhabiting them before. With this kind of 
painful punishment, I punish the transgressors who persist in their disbelief and sins. 

@ And I granted the people of Hud the means of establishment which I have not given you, and I gave them hearing 
to hear with, vision to see with and hearts to understand with. But their hearing did not benefit them at all, nor did their 
vision or intellects. They did not repel Allah’s punishment from them when it came to them, as they used to disbelieve 
in Allah’s signs, and the punishment which they used to mock and which their prophet Hud (peace be upon him) used to 
warn them of befell them. 

@ And I destroyed the cities around you, O people of Makkah; I destroyed Ad, Thamud, the people of Lot and the people 
of Madyan, and I gave them different proof and evidence, in the hope they will return from their disbelief. 

{jp So why did their idols which they took as Allahs besides Allah and which they used to seek closeness to through 
worship and sacrifice not help them? They did not help them at all, but in fact they disappeared from them when they 
needed them the most. And that is the lie and fabrication they did to themselves, i.e., that these idols will benefit them 
and intercede for them with Allah. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The messengers do not have knowledge of the Ghaib, except what their Lord has informed them of. 

2. The people of Hud were deceived when they thought the punishment which was going to befall them was rain, so they 
did not repent before it seized them suddenly. 

3. The power of Ad was more than the power of Quraish, but Allah still destroyed them. 

4. The intelligent is he who takes lesson from others and the ignorant is he who takes lessons from himself. 




■O' 




Al-Ahqaf 


505 


Part 26 














J^sf^ l! i\^5^5^ ^ Vj) ^ 

^s-^.ot <Sy\ Li^^=3 LJL^-^j ^ ($1 

05>^==4>5^^ \^-4 ti 5-^ ,a\y* 

^ d*j 0 \j£ ^'^lytj 

&&$* ^J\2^j 3 ^oj^T 

3^-l 5 jot *i\ 0^ lb^_3^ 0 Oi-^ JiL^? 4 



AIaj 


JJ 


($) 3jy£^ 


@ Remember, O Messenger, when I sent to you a 
group of the jinn to listen to the Qur’an that was re¬ 
vealed to you. When they came to hear it they said 
to one another: Be quiet, so that we are able to hear 
it. When the Messenger (peace be upon him) com¬ 
pleted his recitation they went back to their people 
to warn them of Allah’s punishment if they do not 
have faith in this Qur’an. 

They said to them: O our people, we have heard 
a book that Allah has revealed after Moses, con¬ 
firming the previous scriptures revealed by Allah. 
This book that we heard guides to the truth and it 
guides to a straight path, which is the path of Islam. 
{§} O our people, respond to the truth that Muham¬ 
mad calls you towards and believe that he is a mes¬ 
senger from his Lord, and Allah will forgive your 
sins and save you from a painful punishment that 
awaits you if you do not respond to the truth that 
he calls you towards and do not believe that he is a 
messenger from his Lord. 

@ Those who do not respond to the truth that Mu¬ 
hammad (peace be upon him) calls them towards 
will not be able to render Allah helpless and escape 
from Him by fleeing on earth and they will not have 
besides Allah any protectors to rescue them from 
the punishment. Such people have clearly deviated 
from the truth. 

Do these idolaters who deny the resurrection not 
understand that Allah Who created the heavens and 
created the earth, and did not tire in creating them 
despite their hugeness and vastness, is able to give 
life to the dead for reckoning and recompense? In¬ 
deed, He is able to bring them to life. He, (may He 


Al-Ahqaf 

be glorified), is able to do all things and He is not incapable of bringing the dead to life. 

@ On the day when those who rejected Allah and His messengers will be exposed to the Fire to be punished in it, it will 
be said to them in rebuke: Is this punishment that you are seeing not real? Or is it a lie like how you used to say in the 
world? They will say: Indeed, by Our Lord, it is real. It will then be said them: Taste the punishment on account of your 
denial of Allah. 

@ So be patient - O Messenger - against your people’s denial of you just as the messengers of firm resolve were patient. 
These were the following messengers in addition to our Prophet (peace be upon him): Noah, Abraham, Moses and Jesus 
(peace be upon them). Do not seek to hasten the punishment for them. The deniers from your people, on the day when 
they will see the punishment that they are warned about in the Hereafter, will be as if they did not remain in the world 
except for an hour of a day due to the length of their punishment. This Qur’an that is revealed to Muhammad (peace be 
upon him) is a notice to all people as well to the jinn, and only those who go against Allah by disbelief and sins will be 
destroyed by the punishment. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. It is part of good etiquette to listen to the speaker and pay attention to him. 

2. The prompt response by those jinn who were guided to the truth is a message of encouragement for human beings. 

3. Responding to the truth demands rushing towards spreading it. 

4. Patience is a quality of the prophets (peace be upon them). 


^ 0 )SLj\ 






Part 26 

























o % V 


Vji_r° jU I 


Surah Muhammad 


® Themes of the Surah: 

The Surah focuses on the matter of wartime com¬ 
bat, strengthening the fortitude and resolve of the 
believers. 

® Explanation: 

Those who reject Allah and turn people away 
from Allah’s religion, Allah will nullify their deeds. 
@ Those who have faith in Allah and do righteous 
deeds, and have faith in what Allah has revealed 
to His Messenger Muhammad - and what He has 
revealed to His Messenger Muhammad is the truth 
from their Lord - He will remit from them their 
wrongdoings and wont take them to task, and He 
will set right their affairs in this world and the Here¬ 
after. 

@ That mentioned recompense for the two groups 
is because those who reject Allah followed false¬ 
hood, and those who have faith in Allah and His 
truth from their Lord. 
Thus, their recompense differs just as their efforts 
differed. Just as Allah showed His decision about 
the two groups, the group of the believers and the 
group of the disbelievers, Allah gives people their 
examples, so that similar things are linked. 

© When you, O believers, face those disbelievers 
who wage war against you then strike their necks 
with your swords, and persist in fighting them until 
you subdue them and eradicate their power. Once 
you have subdue them, tie the chains of the cap¬ 
tives. When you capture them you have the option, 
as per the demand of interests, of being graceful to 
them by releasing them for no ransom, ransoming them for wealth or something else, killing them, or enslaving them. 
Continue fighting and capturing them until the war ends by the disbelievers’ accepting Islam or by your entering into a 
treaty with them. The mentioned trial of the believers with the disbelievers, the alternation of fortunes and the victory of 
one over the other, is Allah’s decision. If Allah willed to defeat the disbelievers without a fight. He would have done so, 
but He ordained striving in His path to test some of you with others. He tests who of the believers fights and who doesn’t. 
He tests the disbeliever with the believer: If the believer is killed he enters Paradise and if the believer kills him he enters 
the fire. Those who are killed in Allah’s path, Allah will never nullify their deeds. 

Cp He will enable them to follow the truth in their worldly life and He will set right their affairs. 

He will enter them into Paradise on the day of resurrection, whose description He gave them in the world so they 
recognised it and He showed them their places in it in the Hereafter. 

© O you who have faith in Allah, and who acted on what He ordained for them, if you help Allah by helping His prophet 
and his religion, and by fighting the disbelievers, He will help you by granting you dominance over them and He will 
keep your feet firm in battle when you face them. For those who disbelieved in Allah and His Messenger there is loss 
and destruction and Allah will nullify the reward of their deeds, (jjj) That punishment that will befall them is because they 
detested the Qur’an that Allah revealed to His prophet because it contained the mention of Allah’s Oneness, so Allah de¬ 
stroyed their deeds and they were losers in the world and the Hereafter. @ Have these deniers not travelled the earth and 
reflected over what was the end of those who had denied before them. It was a painful end. Allah destroyed their homes 
above them and destroyed them as well as their children and wealth. Disbelievers in every time and place will receive 
similar punishment. @ That mentioned recompense is for the two groups, because Allah helps those who have faith in 
Him and because the disbelievers have no one to help them. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The usage of overwhelming force in the battlefield is the best means to render an enemy impotent. 2. Being graceful, 
taking ransom, killing, and enslavement are options in Islam for dealing with a disbelieving captive and one of these 
may be applied as per demands of the circumstance. 3. Allah’s helping the believers is contingent on their helping His 
religion. 


j 0jQ 

-- ,9, ,, , £&- hood, and those who havi 

|C Messenger followed the 
.... " 

0 \_y*\t ct$\ 4&\ oh. 


Muhammad 


507 


Part 26 

















^ \^sPj\y^\e- ^y^Oo 4^\ ij)\_ 


**#sv 




•L« 


@ Allah will enter those who have faith in Allah 
and His Messenger and who do righteous deeds 
into gardens under whose palaces and trees rivers 
will flow. Those who reject Allah and His Messen¬ 
ger enjoy in the world by pursuing their desires and 
they eat like how cattle eat. They have no concern 
other than their stomachs and private parts. On the 
day of resurrection, the Fire will be their home to 
which they will go. 

@ How many a town from the towns of the previ¬ 
ous nations had more strength, wealth and children 
than that of Makkah, whose people evicted you 
from it! I destroyed them when they denied their 
messengers, and they had no helper to rescue them 
from Allah’s punishment when it came to them. 

Thus we are not unable to destroy the people of 
Makkah if I intend to do so. 

@ Are those who have clear proof and glaring ev¬ 
idence from their Lord, and therefore worship Him 
with insight, like those for whom Satan has beauti¬ 
fied their evil action, and they followed what their 
desires dictated to them by the worship of idols, the 
commission of sin and denial of the messengers? 

@ The description of Paradise, which Allah has 
promised those who are mindful of Him, by fulfill¬ 
ing His instructions and avoiding His prohibitions, 
that He will make them enter is as follows: In it 
there are rivers of water whose smell and taste have 
not changed due to standing for long. In it there 
are rivers of milk whose taste has not changed. In 
it there are rivers of wine delicious to those who 
drink, and rivers of honey that has been purified 
from all impurities. Therein they will get all types 
of fruit that they wish for. Above all of that they will receive an obliteration of their sins from Allah, Who will not take 
them to task for them. Can the person who has this recompense be equal to those who will remain in the Fire never to 
come out, and who will be given extremely hot water to drink, which will cut the intestines of their stomachs due to its 
extreme heat? 

@ Some of the hypocrites listen to you, O Messenger, but without acceptance and instead turn away, until when they 
leave your presence they say to those whom Allah had given knowledge: ‘What did he say in his talk just now?’ pretend¬ 
ing to be ignorant and turning away. They are the ones whose hearts Allah has sealed, and thus no good reaches it, and 
they follow their desires, which have made them blind to the truth. 

@ Those who are guided to the path of truth and to follow what the Messenger (peace be upon him) brought, their Lord 
increases them in guidance and direction to the truth, and He inspires them to do that which will protect them from the 
fire. 

@ Are the disbelievers waiting for anything but the hour to come on them suddenly without their having any prior 
knowledge of it? Its signs have already come, such as the mission of the Prophet (peace be upon him) and the splitting of 
the moon. How will they then take heed when the hour comes? It is unlikely that the reminder will be of benefit to them. 
@ Be certain, O Messenger, that there is no being deserving of worship besides Allah and seek from Allah forgiveness 
for your sins. Seek forgiveness from Him for the sins of the believing men and women. Allah knows your movements in 
the day and your resting place at night. Nothing is hidden from Him. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The disbeliever’s concern is limited to enjoying fleeting pleasures in the world. 

2. A comparison between the recompense of the believers and the recompense of the disbelievers will show the vast 
difference between them, so that the intelligent person can choose to be a believer and the foolish person can choose to 
be a disbeliever. 

3. An exposition of the bad manners displayed by the hypocrites with the Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him). 

4. Knowledge precedes statements and action. 


>1*0 X l JP bUiO^ 

Crt if ££ 

\j&\ * 3 ^ \ \\£j\ \S ii 

Cfj^J ($)j^ 



















l3 oJ^\ C^13 (, 







& 


\\ 


ufj>' 


o'* 






JjOki ^ Si 0 W C-^3 C^>^ | 

3 pl^ \>a>^=== ^-< j ->,j^\ ^ \s j^4-^ ^Lto (^) >-41 



(jj) Those who have faith in Allah say, longing for 
Allah to reveal to His Messenger a surah containing 
the instruction for fighting: ‘Why does not Allah re¬ 
veal a surah in which fighting is mentioned. ’ When 
Allah reveals a decisive unabrogated surah contain¬ 
ing the mention of fighting, you, O Messenger, will 
see those hypocrites in whose hearts there is doubt 
looking at you like one who is unconscious on ac¬ 
count of extreme fear and terror. So woe to them for 
withdrawing from fighting and being afraid of it. 
@ To follow Allah’s instruction and to utter fit¬ 
ting words that are not unseemly is better for them. 
When fighting is imposed and the matter becomes 
serious, if they are true to Allah, in their having 
faith in Him and following Him, it would be better 
for them than hypocrisy and going against Allah’s 
instructions. 

@ It is most probable that if you turn away from 
having faith in Allah and following Him, you will 
make mischief on earth by disbelief and sins, and 
you will cut family ties, just as you used to do in the 
period of ignorance. 

@ Those who are described as making mischief 
on earth and cutting family ties are the ones whom 
Allah has distanced from His mercy, whose ears He 
has made deaf to hearing the truth with acceptance 
and submission, and whose sight He has blinded 
from seeing it with reflection. 

@ Will these people who turn away not ponder 
over the Qur’an and reflect over what is in it? If 
they pondered over it, it will guide them to every 
good and will distance them from every evil. Or 
are there locks on the hearts of these people that are 
tightly closed, so that no advice reaches them and no reminder benefits them? 

(jjS) Those who turn back from their belief towards disbelief and hypocrisy, after the proof has been established for them 
and the truth of the Prophet (peace be upon him) has become clear to them, Satan is the one who has beautified for them 
disbelief and hypocrisy and has raised distant hopes in them. 

@ Such deviation occurred to them because they secretly said to the idolaters who hate the revelation that He had sent 
down to His messenger: We will follow you in some matters such as impeding the fighting. Allah knows what they keep 
hidden and what they make public. Nothing is hidden from Him and He will make apparent whatever He wishes to His 
messenger. 

@ What will you think of the punishment and the gruesome state they will be in when the angels assigned to remove their 
souls will remove them, striking their faces and backs with steel hammers. 

(SjfS) That severe punishment that will occur when their souls are removed is because they followed everything that brought 
Allah’s wrath on them, such as disbelief, hypocrisy, opposition to Allah and His messenger, and they hated what brings 
them close to their Lord and draws down on them His pleasure, such as faith in Allah and following His messenger. Thus 
Allah nullified their deeds. 

Do those hypocrites in whose hearts there is doubt think that Allah will not bring out and expose their malice? He will 
certainly bring it out by testing them with trials to distinguish the person who is true in faith from the one who is false, 
and so that the believer becomes apparent and the hypocrite is exposed. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Legislation of striving in Allah’s path distinguishes the hypocrites from the rank of the believers. 

2. The importance of reflecting over the Book of Allah and the danger of neglecting it. 

3. Disbelief and hypocrisy are causes for punishment in the Transitory Stage. 


(^) »-\_3 

^ JS 1 % ||~ 





















:M | 

Z4&)j 


o&\ i ol0^5K=^ h&j 

jJo J ^\}~&j | 

\^xJj^\ \y)is> i^} \>43 

\ \jk^Jh)j ^\\jk~J&’\ \y^\'t- jjr^\ L^jGj-:;!^) i 
J-w Z)\0js\ £x -1 

| 0^_>^5 tSJtj ji\sj£i-\ lLt >\ 

0^===?Sl3t4^ ^>^4j jK^>di 


@ If I wished to point out the hypocrites to you, O 
Messenger, I would have shown them to you and 
you would have recognised them by their marks. 

You will soon recognise them by their manner of 
speech. Allah knows your deeds. Nothing of them 
is hidden from Him and He will recompense you 
for the same. 

@ I will test you, O believers, with striving in Al¬ 
lah’s path and fighting and killing the enemy until 
I know - in a manner that makes it apparent to the 
servants - those of you who strive in Allah’s path, 
and those of you who are steadfast in fighting the 
enemy. I will test you so that I know those of you 
who are sincere and those who are false. 

@ Those who reject Allah and His messenger, who 
abstain from Allah’s religion themselves and also 
prevent others from it, and who go against the Mes¬ 
senger and oppose him after it has become clear 
that he is a prophet, they do not harm Allah. They 
only harm themselves, and Allah will nullify their 
deeds. 

@ O you who have faith in Allah, and who act 
on what He ordained, follow Allah and follow 
the Messenger by fulfilling their instructions and 
avoiding their prohibitions, and do not nullify your 
deeds by disbelief and ostentation. 

Those who disbelieved in Allah and turned 
themselves as well as people away from Allah’s re¬ 
ligion, and then passed away as disbelievers with¬ 
out repenting, Allah will not overlook their sins by 
covering them, rather He will take them to task for 
it and He will enter them into the Fire to remain 
there forever. 

@ So do not become weak, O believers, in confronting your enemy, and call them to peace before they call you to it, 
when you are dominant and have the upper hand over them. Allah is with you with His help and support. He will not 
reduce the reward of your deeds at all. Instead, He will give you an increase in it out of His bounty, 
jj} The life of the world is only play and amusement. An intelligent person should not become occupied by it instead of 
working for his Hereafter. If you have faith in Allah and His messenger, and you are mindful of Allah by fulfilling His 
instructions and avoiding His prohibitions, He will give you the reward of your deeds in full without any reduction, and 
He will not ask you for all of your wealth. He will only ask you for the Zakat. 

(Sjj) If He had to ask you for all of your wealth and insist in this request from you, you will become miserly with it, and 
He will bring out the greed and miserliness in your hearts. Thus that fact He is not asking it from you is out of kindness. 
(S§| Here you are being called to spend a part of your wealth in Allah’s path, and you are not asked to spend all your 
wealth. Some of you desist from the required spending out of miserliness. Whoever is too miserly to spend a portion 
of his wealth in Allah’s path, is actually being miserly to his own detriment, as he is depriving himself of the reward of 
spending. Allah is the Self-sufficient Who is not in need of your spending. You are the ones in need of Him. If you turn 
back from Islam to disbelief, He will destroy you and bring a people besides you. Then they will not be like you, but they 
will be obedient to Him. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The hypocrites have certain attributes by which they can be recognised no matter how hard they try to conceal them. 

2. Tests are a divine practice to distinguish the believers from the hypocrites. 

3. Allah supports His believing servants by His help and guidance. 

4. It is Allah’s kindness to His servants that He does ask them to spend all of their wealth in Allah’s path. 






Muhammad 


510 


Part 26 


















The Victory (Surah Al-Fath) 


1 


|M1 




jAs^jo 

ojis <j aj!s3j\ ^ jy^v; 

_ ^ y J $ "o^ S' ^ ^ ^ 0 

c£^15oOp^ | 

c5^9^- 

oC^S *££$ 

)\^ ^ ^ -A g c. H 





\fl 

\±H ] ^ 

a/ 


AJ> 


UJ 




^ Themes of the Surah: 

It focusses on the divine promise of victory and em¬ 
powerment to His prophet and to the believers who 
are since in promoting the religion. 

® Explanation: 

© I have given you, O Messenger, a clear victory 
by the Treaty of Hudaibiyya. 

© So that Allah may forgive you for your sins be¬ 
fore this victory and after it and complete His fa¬ 
vour on you by assisting your religion and guiding 
you to a straight path, in which there is no crooked¬ 
ness, which is the straight path of Islam. 

© Allah will help you against your enemies with a 
mighty assistance that no one can remove. 

© Allah is the One Who sent down stability and 
tranquility into the hearts of the believers so that 
they increase in faith over and above their faith. To 
Allah alone belongs the forces of the heavens and 
the earth, He supports with them whoever of His 
servants He wishes. Allah knows the interests of 
His servants and He is Wise in the assistance and 
support that He gives. 

© To enter those men and women who have faith 
in Allah and in His Messenger into gardens with 
streams flowing under their palaces and trees, and 
obliterate from them their wrongdoings and not 
take them to task for it. That which has been men¬ 
tioned - about the attainment of the objective of 
Paradise and removal of the dreaded culpability for 
wrongdoings - in the sight of Allah is a great suc¬ 
cess that no other success can come close to. 

© And to punish the hypocrites, male and female, and to punish those men and women who ascribe partners to Allah, and 
who think that Allah will not assist His religion and not raise His word, and that fortune will turn against the believers, but 
fortune turned against them. Allah became angry with them because of their disbelief and evil thought and He expelled 
them from His mercy and prepared for them in the afterlife Hell, which they will enter to remain there forever. What a 
miserable place of return for them! 

© To Allah belong the forces of the heavens 

and the earth. He supports with it whoever of His servants He wishes. Allah is Mighty Whom none can overcome; Wise 
in His creation, estimation and planning. 

© I have sent you - O Messenger - as a witness to give testimony against your nation on the day of resurrection, and as 
one to give good news to the believers of the victory and empowerment Allah has prepared for them in the world, and 
of the bliss He has prepared for them in the Hereafter, and to warn the disbelievers of the humiliation and defeat at the 
hands of the believers that He has prepared for them in the world, and the painful punishment awaiting them that He has 
prepared for them in the Hereafter, 

© In the hope that you have faith in Allah and have faith in His messenger, and you revere and honour His messenger, 
and that you glorify Allah at the beginning and at the end of the day. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The treaty of Hudaibiyya was the beginning of a great victory for Islam and the Muslims. 

2. Serenity is one of the effects of faith that brings about tranquility and stability. 

3. The danger of having evil thoughts about Allah, because Allah treats people in accordance to what they think of Him, 
(may He be glorified). 

4. The obligation of honouring and revering the Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him). 



±)' 


J $ J a, J*' > A 9 3 ** 

j o 


































h£- r*^ 

j 3 


ill3'c^3 

i3_jA^—<-" (!y!) l ^ - V? 4j^l A_^'^ -V^lC' La-J 



^ C 



@ Those who pledge the allegiance of Al-Ridwan 
to you, O Messenger, to fight the idolaters of Mak- 
kah, are only pledging allegiance to Allah, because 
He is the One Who instructed them to fight the idol¬ 
aters and He is the One Who will give them recom¬ 
pense. The hand of Allah is over their hands at the 
time of the pledge and He is aware of them. Noth¬ 
ing of theirs is hidden from them. Whoever breaks 
his pledge and does not fulfil the promise he made 
with Allah to assist His religion, then his breaking 
his pledge and promise is to his own detriment. Al¬ 
lah is not harmed by that. Whoever fulfils his prom¬ 
ise to Allah to assist His religion, Allah will grant 
him a great reward, which is Paradise. 

@ Those desert Arabs whom Allah had kept be¬ 
hind from accompanying you, O Messenger, on 
your journey to His House will say to you when 
you reproach them: ‘Taking care of our wealth and 
looking after our children kept us busy from going 
out with you. So ask for forgiveness from Allah on 
our behalf for our sins.’ They say with their tongues 
what is not in their hearts by asking the Prophet 
(peace be upon him) to seek forgiveness for them; 
because they have not repented from their sins. Say 
to them: No one can do anything for you against 
Allah, if He intends good for you, or if He intends 
bad for you. Rather, Allah is well aware of what 
you do. Nothing of your actions is hidden from Him 
no matter how much you try to conceal it. 

(Sjj) The excuse of being preoccupied with taking 
care of your wealth and children as presented by 
you was not the reason for remaining behind going 
out with him. Rather, you thought that the Messen¬ 
ger and his companions will all die and they won’t return to their families in Madina. Satan also made this seem fine in 
your hearts and you had an evil thought about your Lord that He will not help His prophet. You were a ruined people 
because of the evil thought that you had about Allah and because of your remaining behind His messenger. 

(jp The person who does not have faith in Allah and His Messenger is a disbeliever. I have prepared on the Day of Res¬ 
urrection for those who deny Allah a blazing fire by which they will be punished. 

ijp To Allah alone belongs the control of the heavens and the control of the earth. He forgives the sins of those of His serv¬ 
ants whom He wills and enters them into Paradise through His grace. He punishes those of His servants whom He wills 
out of His justice. Allah forgives the sins of those of His servants who repent to Him and He is merciful towards them. 

@ Those whom Allah had kept behind - when you, O believers, set off to take the spoils of Khaybar which Allah had 
promised you after the Treaty of Hudaibiyya, will say: ‘Let us go out with you to get some of it.’ These people who were 
left behind want to change, by this request of theirs, Allah’s promise that He made to the believers after the Treaty of 
Hudaibiyya to give them alone the spoils of Khaybar. Say to them, O Messenger: You will never follow us to those spoils, 
because Allah has promised us that the spoils of Khaybar are only for those who were present at Hudaibiyya. They will 
say: Your preventing us from following you to Khaybar is not an instruction from Allah, but because you are jealous of 
us. The matter is not as these people who were left behind claim. Rather, they do not understand Allah’s instructions and 
prohibitions except a little, and therefore they have fallen into going against Him. 

Beneficial Points: 

1. The status of the pledge of allegiance of Al-Ridwan is great in Allah’s sight and the people of this pledge are the best 
people on the face of the earth. 

2. Presenting false excuses is the attribute of those who are weak in faith. 

3. Those who are weak in faith are few in number at the time of anxiety but many at the time of desiring something. 


J j CS>\ 4^1) 


Al-Fath 


512 




















0 



@ O Messenger! Say to those bedouins who failed 
to travel to Makkah with you, testing them: “You 
will soon be called to fighting against a strong, 
courageous group of people whom you shall either 
have to fight in the path of Allah, or they may enter 
into Islam without a fight. If you obey Allah in Him 
inviting you to fight them, He will give you a good 
reward, i.e. Paradise, but if you turn away from His 
obedience, just like you turned away from travel¬ 
ling with the Messenger to Makkah, He will inflict 
a painful punishment on you.” 

@ There is no sin on a person excused due to blind¬ 
ness, disability or illness if he fails to fight in the 
path of Allah. Whoever obeys Allah and His Mes¬ 
senger, He will enter him into gardens under the 
trees and palaces of which rivers flow; whilst who¬ 
ever turns away from their obedience, Allah will 
inflict a painful punishment on him. 

@ Verily, Allah was pleased with the believers 
when they were giving their oaths to you at Huday- 
blyyah i.e. Bay‘at Al-Ridwan under the tree. Allah 
knew of the faith, sincerity and honesty in their 
hearts and sent down tranquility on their hearts. 
And He rewarded them for it with a victory in the 
near future i.e. the victory over Khaybar, as conso¬ 
lation for them missing out on being able to enter 
Makkah. 

@ And He also granted them with many spoils that 
they took from the people of Khaybar. Allah is the 
Almighty whom no one can overcome; the Wise in 
His creation, decree and management. 

(jp O believers! Allah promises you of acquiring 
many spoils in future Islamic victories, but He has 
given you the spoils of Khaybar in advance and stopped the hands of the Jews when they intended to capture your fam¬ 
ilies after you. And He has done this so that these advanced spoils become a sign for you of the help of Allah and His 
support for you. And Allah guides you to a straight path in which there is no deviance. 

And Allah promises you with spoils you have not yet been able to attain. Allah alone is capable of letting you acquire 
them; they are part of the plans and knowledge of Allah. Allah is capable of everything; nothing is outside His ability. 

@ O believers! If those who disbelieved in Allah and His Messenger were to fight you, they would turn their backs, 
defeated and fleeing. They would not find any guardian who would take care of their matter, nor any helper who would 
help them in fighting against you. 

@ The believers being victorious and consequent defeat of the disbelievers is established in every place and era; it is a 
divine custom of Allah prevalent in the nations that have passed before these rejectors. O Messenger! You will not find 
any change in the divine custom of Allah. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The Qur’an informs of matters of the future which occurred afterwards, like the victories of Islam. It is a definitive 
proof that the noble Qur’an is a revelation from Allah. 

2. The rulings of the Shariah are based on gentleness and ease. 

3. The reward of those who took part in Bay 4 at Al-Ridwan is part advanced in this world, and part saved for them in 
Hereafter. 

4. The truth and people of the truth being ultimately victorious over falsehood and its people is a divine custom of Allah. 


j AikA2 >-Ij Jca 

£ ^ j 

Al-Fath 


513 


Part 26 






















05 os^c5 aJ 3^9 

(^) lJaL^x)L< 0 4J^\ J tejjS3-Aio 
j^j—^>\ (j^jT? JLa 

^.3-j 3 \&^\jla <S -^33 





@ He is the one who prevented the hands of the 
idolaters from getting to you when approximately 
seventy men came at Hudayblyyah, intending to 
cause you harm. He stopped you from them; you 
did not kill them or cause them any harm. Rather, 
you freed them after Allah made it possible for you 
to capture them. And Allah is watchful over your 
actions; none of your actions are hidden from Him. 

|Jj) They are the ones who disbelieved in Allah and 
His Messenger, and stopped you and the sacrificial 
animals from Al-Masjid Al-Haram. The animals 
remained barred from reaching the Haram where 
they were to be sacrificed. Had it not been for a 
few believing men whom you did not know were 
believers, and by killing the disbelievers you could 
have killed them also, and incurred sin and had to 
pay blood money unknowingly, Allah would have 
allowed you to liberate Makkah so that He may en¬ 
ter into His mercy whoever He wished i.e. the be¬ 
lievers in Makkah. If the disbelievers were distin¬ 
guished from the believers in Makkah, Allah would 
have definitely punished those who disbelieved in 
Him and His Messenger with a painful punishment. 

(Sjj Remember when those who disbelieved in Al¬ 
lah and His Messenger harboured in their hearts the 
pride of ignorance; an ignorance that was linked to 
desires and not the truth. They haughtily rejected 
the entrance of the Messenger of Allah (peace be 
upon him) into Makkah the year of the treaty of Hu- 
dayblyyah, fearing and blaming him that he would 
overpower them and take control over it. Therefore, 

Allah sent down tranquility from Himself upon the 
His Messenger and upon the believers so their an¬ 
ger did not lead to them confronting the idolaters with the same actions. Allah made the believers firm upon the statement 
of truth, i.e. ‘There is none worthy of worship except for Allah’, and kept them firm upon fulfilling its rights which they 
fulfilled. The believers were more worthy of this statement than others, and more deserving of it because of the goodness 
within their hearts that Allah knew of. And Allah is aware of everything; nothing is hidden from Him. 

@ Verily, Allah truly made the dream of His Messenger a reality; He showed it to him in his sleep and he them informed 
his companions of it. The dream was that he and his companions were entering the sacred house of Allah in safety from 
their enemies, with some of them having shaved their heads and some having only trimmed their hair, indicating the com¬ 
pletion of their acts of pilgrimage. O believers! Allah knows some advantages that you did not know of, and so instead 
of making the dream a reality by letting you enter Makkah that year, He will give you a victory in the near future i.e. the 
signing of the treaty of Hudayblyyah and the conquest of Khaybar that followed it at the hands of the believers who had 
witnessed Hudayblyyah. 

(Sj) Allah is the one who sent His Messenger Muhammad (peace be upon him) with a clear message and a true religion: 
the religion of Islam, so that He may make it prevail over all its opposing religions. Allah has testified to that, and He is 
sufficient as a witness. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Preventing from the path of Allah is a crime that deserves a painful torment. 

2. Allah’s management of the requirements of His servants is beyond their limited understanding. 

3. We have been warned against taking pride in our forefathers and gender on account of religion. 

4. The dreams of the prophet are true, and they are a type of revelation. 

5. It is not necessary that a true dream becomes a reality immediately. 

6. The prevailing of the religion of Islam is a divine promise and custom of Allah that will soon occur. 


3^33 

($)\ 4j^\j ^4^=0!^ 3 p 35-^4? 3^ 


















0 ^ l 




Jfejo \ Jp ikxjs ^\j J^43 Al>cS 

^ ^ ^ **^ ^ 

j^iy 

(jj-4&*J Sfc (3^r^>y <J 

^>>-\ *^y 

(j^\ 4^\ -XCJ_JIj^vi \ 



@ Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah, and his 
companions are strict against the combatant dis¬ 
believers and merciful, affectionate and friendly 
among themselves. O onlooker! You will see them 
bowing and prostrating, seeking from Allah that He 
grace them with forgiveness, a generous reward 
and that He becomes pleased with them. Their 
mark is on their faces as a result of prostrating in 
obedience to Allah. That is how they have been de¬ 
scribed by the Torah: the book that was revealed to 
Moses (peace be upon him). As for their mention in 
the Gospel which was revealed to Jesus, it is that 
they are likened in their assisting one another and 
perfection like crops that have emerged as small, 
then strengthened and stood straight up, pleasing 
the farmers with their strength and perfection. It is 
so that the disbelievers are angered by the strength, 
steadfastness and perfection they see within them. 
Wy\ \d&Yo,^A\yu u\ / C u/^Td^’vTxNJ \ Po\\\\ /4Vr And Allah has promised those of the companions 

who have faith in Him and do good deeds forgive¬ 
ness for their sins - they will not be taken to ac¬ 
count over them, and a great reward from Himself 

i.e. Paradise. 

The Dwellings (Surah Al-Hujurat) 

Topic of the Surah: 

Emphasis on developing the Muslim community 
with the perfections of faith and character, after 
many had accepted Islam in the year of the delega¬ 
tions in their diversity. 

<!*> Explanation: 

(JfJ) O those who have faith in Allah and follow 
whatever He legislates! Do not precede Allah or His Messenger in speech or action, and be mindful of Allah by fulfilling 
His commands and refrain from that which He has prohibited. Indeed, Allah is hearing of your statements, aware of your 
actions. He does not miss any of them and will soon requite you for them. 

jj) O those who have faith in Allah and follow whatever He legislates! Show good manners with His Messenger: do not 
raise your voices in his presence nor speak loudly to him out of respect for him, like you raise your voices to each other 
whilst talking to them. It is feared that the rewards of your deeds are nullified if you do so, whilst you do not realise they 
have been nullified. 

{J) Indeed, those who lower their voices near the Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him), they are the ones whose hearts 
Allah has examined for His consciousness, and chosen them for it. For them is forgiveness for their sins; they will not be 
accounted for them, and they will receive a great reward on the Day of Judgement, which will be that Allah enters them 
into Paradise. 

© O Messenger! Indeed, those bedouins who call out to you from behind the dwellings of your wives, the majority of 
them do not understand, so do not worry about them, because if they were understanding, they would surely show good 
manners to you and would definitely wait until you came out to them. Then, when you came out to them, they would 
speak to you about their matters by lowering their voices. However, most of them have not yet understood this. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The companions of the Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him) enjoy a privilege over all people since Adam, except 
for the Prophets. 

2. Showing mercy to the believer and strictness to the combatant disbeliever has been legislated by Allah. 

3. Coherence and assisting one another are characteristics of the companions of the Messenger (peace be upon him). 

4. Disbelief is feared upon whoever finds dislike in his heart for the noble companions. 

5. It is obligatory to show good manners to the Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him), and to his sunnah and his in¬ 
heritors (the scholars). 


\yd\j aW <s -G yj i \ 

6 # 


oy. 


3 


0 


Al-Hujurat 


Part 26 
























0 ' 



tio [ 3 -^ j^W 0 ^ c CJJ& 0^5 0 




@ O Messenger! If these people who call out to 
you from behind the dwellings of your wives were 
to have waited and not called out to you until you 
came out to them, then talked to you in lowered 
voices, it would have been better for them than call¬ 
ing out to you from behind the dwellings, because 
it would have been more dignified and respectful. 

And Allah Forgiving of the sins of those of them 
who repent, and others. He Forgiving of them due 
to their ignorance, and is merciful to them. 

O those who have faith in Allah and act upon 
whatever He legislates! If a wrongdoer brings some 
news about a group of people to you, then verify 
the truth of that news and do not hasten towards 
accepting it, in fear that if you accept it without 
verifying it, you could harm a group of people ig¬ 
norantly. Then after having harmed them, you will 
regret it when the falsehood of the news becomes 
clear to you. 

((J) O believers! Know that amongst you is the Mes¬ 
senger of Allah upon whom revelation descends, so 
beware of lying in case he receives revelation in¬ 
forming him of your lying. He is better aware of 
your needs; if he was to obey you in many of the 
things you suggest, you would surely fall into dif¬ 
ficulty which he would not want for you. However, 

Allah has, through His grace, made faith beloved to 
you and has beautified it for your hearts and so you 
accepted it, while making you hate disbelief, diso¬ 
bedience and sin. Those who possess these qualities 
are the ones who are treading the path of correct¬ 
ness and righteousness. 

CfJ) The beautification of goodness and hating of 
evil that you have achieved is only through the grace of Allah which He bestowed upon you and favoured you with. And 
Allah is aware of those of His servants who are grateful to Him and so He gives them the ability; He is Wise in that He 
places each thing in its appropriate place. 

@ O believers! If two groups of believers quarrel with one another, then reconcile between them by inviting them to 
let the law of Allah be the judgement between them. Then, if one of the two reject the reconciliation and transgresses, 
fight the transgressing group until it returns to accepting the command of Allah. If it returns, reconcile between the two 
groups with fairness and justice. And be fair in your judgement between them, indeed, Allah loves those who are fair in 
their judgement. 

The believers are brothers in Islam, and brotherhood in Islam demands that you, O believers, reconcile between your 
quarrelling brothers. And be mindful of Allah by fulfilling His commands and refrain from that which He has prohibited; 
in the hope that you will be shown mercy. 

@ O those who have faith in Allah and act upon what He has legislated! A group of you should not mock another; perhaps 
those that have been mocked are better according to Allah. True consideration is only for what Allah considers. And a 
group of women should not mock another group of women; perhaps the group mocked at is better according to Allah. Do 
not taunt the souls of your brothers, because they are like your own souls, and do not call others with names they do not 
like - as was the case of a few of the Ansar before the arrival of the Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him). Whoever 
does that is a wrongdoer, and deviance is a very bad trait after having brought faith. Whoever does not repent from these 
sins are oppressing themselves by placing themselves in situations of destruction due to the sins they commit. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. It is obligatory to verify the truth of news, especially the news Of a person suspected of deviance. 

2. It is obligatory to reconcile between two quarrelling groups of Muslims. Fighting the group that insists on transgression 
and rejects reconciliation is also legislated. 

3. From the rights of brotherhood in faith is reconciling between two quarrelling people. Another is distancing oneself 
from anything that hurts another’s feelings, i.e. mocking, taunting and calling names. 


j 


jy ^ 














@ O those who have faith in Allah and act upon 
what He has legislated! Stay away from most suspi¬ 
cions which are not based on causes and indications 
that give them credence, because some suspicions 
are sinful, like suspecting one who is apparently 
pious. And do not persue the faults of believers be¬ 
hind their backs, nor mention another in a manner 
he dislikes, because mentioning him in a manner he 
dislikes is like eating his flesh whilst he is dead. Do 
any of you wish to eat the flesh of his dead brother? 
Therefore, abhor backbiting him because it is like 
that. And be mindful of Allah by fulfilling His com¬ 
mands and refrain from that which He has prohibit¬ 
ed. Indeed, Allah Forgiving of those of His servants 
who repent; merciful to them. 

@ O people! Indeed, I have created you from one 
male: your father Adam, and one female: your 
mother Eve. Therefore, your lineage is the same, so 
some of you should not take pride in lineage over 
others. Then, I made you into many nations and dis¬ 
persed tribes, so that you may recognise one anoth¬ 
er; not so that you take pride in them, because pride 
can only be due to Allah-consciousness; Indeed, the 
most noble from among you according to Allah is 
the one who is most mindful of Him. Indeed, Allah 
is aware of your conditions, knowing of what levels 
of perfection and deficiency you are on; nothing is 
hidden from him. 

@ When some of the bedouins came to the Prophet 
(peace be upon him), they said, “We have brought 
faith in Allah and His Messenger.” O Messenger! 
Say to them: “You have not brought faith, instead, 
say: “We have submitted and obeyed”. Faith has 
not yet entered your hearts; it is hoped that it does enter. O bedouins! If you obey Allah and His Messenger in faith, in 
doing good deeds, and in refraining from the unlawful, Allah will not decrease the reward of your deeds in the slightest. 
Indeed, Allah Forgiving of those of His servants who repent and is merciful to them.” 

jjj) The believers are only those who have faith in Allah and His Messenger, and then do not pollute their faith with doubts 
and strive in the way of Allah with their wealth and souls, not holding back on anything. Those are the ones truthful in 
their faith. 

@ O Messenger! Say to these bedouins: “Are you teaching Allah and informing Him about your religion, whilst Allah 
knows all that is in the heavens and on earth; He knows everything and nothing is hidden from him, so He does not need 
you to inform Him about your religion.” 

@ O Messenger! These bedouins recount their favour upon you by mentioning their Islam. Say to them: “Do not recount 
your entering the religion of Allah as a favour upon me; its benefit - if achieved - will return to you alone. Rather, it is 
Allah who recounts His favour upon you that He granted you the ability to enter into His religion, if indeed, you are 
truthful in your claim that you have entered into it.” 

@ Indeed, Allah knows the Ghaib of the heavens and the earth; nothing is hidden from him. And Allah is watchful of 
your actions; none of them are hidden from Him, and He will soon requite you for the good and bad of your deeds. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Thinking suspiciously of good people is a sin, while taking precautions from the people of evil and being suspicious 
of them is permissible. 

2. The humans coming from one origin demands that they do not take pride over one another in lineage. 

3. Faith is not just speech without the necessary beliefs; rather, it is belief with the heart, proclaiming with the tongue, 
and practicing upon the integrals. 

4. Guiding and granting ability is in the power of Allah alone. 



o W 




iOl 




\ i^:\ \ Qfe | 

' 1 \ 








0 jLAt (jAj? 


Al-Hujurat 


517 


Part 26 



















Surah Qaf 

® Topic of the Surah: 

Emphasis on awakening the negligent hearts and 
encouraging them to understand the realities of res¬ 
urrection, its proof and scenes. 

® Explanation: 

@ Qaf. The discussion on similar letters has al¬ 
ready passed in Surah Al-Baqarah. Allah takes an 
oath on the noble Qur’an because of the meanings, 
abundant goodness and blessings it contains. He 
takes an oath on that you shall surely be resurrect¬ 
ed on the Day of Judgement for accountability and 
requital. 

The cause of their rejection was not that they ex¬ 
pected you to lie, because they know your honesty. 

Rather, they are amazed that a warning messenger 
came to them from their own species, not from the 
angels. They say, in amazement, “A human mes¬ 
senger coming to us is a strange thing!” 

@ “Will we be resurrected after we have died and 
turned into dust? Resurrection, and life returning 
to our bodies after they have decomposed is a far¬ 
fetched thing; it is impossible it will happen.” 

Verily, I know how much of their bodies the 
earth eats away after their death; it is not hidden 
from Me. I have a book that preserves everything I 
have decreed for them in their lives and after their 
deaths. 

Rather, these idolaters rejected the Qur’an 
when His Messenger brought it to them. They are 
in uncertainty regarding it; they cannot stay firm on 
anything regarding it. 

After Allah mentions the idolaters rejecting the resurrection, He reminds them of evidence for its occurring. He says: 

@ Do these rejectors of the resurrection not ponder over the sky above them: how I created it, made it and adorned it 
with the stars 1 placed in it, and it does not have any cracks to spoil it? The being who created this sky is not incapable 
of resurrecting the dead alive. 

(JfJ) And I spread the earth in a manner fitting to live on, placing within it firm mountains so that it does not shake. I also 
caused all types of beautiful plants and trees to grown on it. 

Cj) I created all that as an enlightenment and reminder for every servant who turns to his Lord in obedience. 

{J} And I send down rainwater from the sky, which contains abundant benefits and goodness. With that water, I then cause 
gardens to grow and the crops you harvest, i.e. barley etc. 

((§|) I also cause tall date palms to grow, which have closely arranged minute flowers, one above the other. 

@ I cause all that to grow, as provision for the servants so that they can eat from it. I also revive through the rainwater 
barren lands which have no growth, and just as I revive the barren earth I will also revive the dead who will emerge alive. 
@ O Messenger! Before these people who have rejected you, many nations rejected their Prophets. The people of Noah, 
the people of The Well and the Thamud all denied their Prophets. 

C§5 The Aad and people of Pharaoh, together with the people of Lot, all denied their Prophets. 

@ The people of Shu‘ayb: the people of the Thicket, also denied their Prophet. The punishment that Allah promised them 
was then proven. 

Am I then incapable of having created you in the first instance, that I am incapable of resurrecting you? Rather, they 
are in confusion about a new creation after their previous creation. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The idolaters regard messengership for humans to be significant, yet they attribute the quality of lordship to a stone! 

2. The creation of the heavens, the earth, the sending of rain, causing barren lands to grow, and the initial creation are all 
evidence of the resurrection. 

3. Rejection of the Messengers was a tradition of the previous nations, and punishing the rejectors is a divine custom of 
Allah. 


La LuLLp 

^LLjLq ( £) l 


























L416- 




@ And I have already created man and know what his 
soul whispers to him, and I am closer to him than [his] 
jugular vein. Verily, I created the human and I know the 
thoughts and desires that pass his mind. I am closer to 
him than the vein that is present in his neck and connect¬ 
ed to his heart. @ When the two receivers receive, seat¬ 
ed on the right and on the left. When the two receiving 
angels receive his deeds: one sitting on his right, and the 
other seated on his left. @ Man does not utter any word 
except that with him is an observer prepared [to record]. 
He does not utter any statement except that there is an 
angel anticipating whatever he says, present. @ And the 
intoxication of death will bring the truth; that is what you 
were trying to avoid. The pangs of death are a reality and 
will come; there is no escaping from them. O negligent 
human! That is what you used to turn away from and de¬ 
lay. (jp And the Horn will be blown. That is the Day of 
[carrying out] the threat. The angel appointed to blow the 
trumpet will blow for the second time. That is the Day of 
Judgement, the day of the punishment the disbelievers 
and sinners have been warned of. @ And every soul will 
come, with it a driver and a witness. Each soul will come 
with an angel driving it, and an angel testifying against it 
for its deeds. @ [It will be said], “You were certainly in 
heedlessness of this, and I have removed from you your 
cover, so your sight, this Day, is sharp.” It will be said 
to this human who is being driven, verily, in the world 
you were in neglect regarding this day because of you 
being deceived by your desires and pleasures. So I have 
removed your neglect from you by the punishment and 
horror you see before you. Your eyesight is sharp today; 
you now see everything you were neglectful of! (jp And 
his companion, [the angel], will say, “This [record] is 
what is with me, prepared.” His companion, the angel ap¬ 
pointed to him will say, “These are his actions I have with 
*3* me that I present, without any increase nor decrease.” 

[Allah will say], “Throw into Hell every obstinate disbeliever, Allah will say to the two angels: the driver and the testifier, “Throw 
into hell every stubborn rejector of the truth.” ((J) Preventer of good, aggressor, and doubter, “Who is frequent preventer of the truth 
Allah has made obligatory on him, transgressor of the limits of Allah, doubter in whatever promise or warning he is given.” (jp) Who 
made [as equal] with Allah another deity; then throw him into the severe punishment. “The one who attributes another deity with Allah 
and makes him a partner in worship. So throw him into the severe punishment.” @ His [satan] companion will say, “Our Lord, I did 
not make him transgress, but he [himself] was in extreme error.” His companion from the satans will say, proclaiming innocence from 
him, “O my Lord! I did not lead him astray; he himself was in deviance, far away from the truth.” @ [Allah] will say, “Do not dispute 
before Me, while I had already presented to you the warning. Allah will say: “Do not argue in front of Me; there is no benefit in that, 
because I gave the message to you in the world beforehand with the severe warnings that My messengers brought to you for those 
who disbelieved in Me and disobeyed Me. (jpThe word will not be changed with Me, and never will I be unjust to the servants.” The 
statement cannot be changed with Me, and I do not turn back on My promise. I do not oppress My servants by decreasing their good 
deeds, nor by increasing their evil deeds. Rather, I requite them for whatever they have done. On the Day I will say to Hell, “Have 
you been filled?” and it will say, “Are there some more,” On the day I will say to hell, “Are you full with all the disbelievers and sinners 
that have been thrown into you?” It will reply to its Lord, saying, “Is there any more?” asking for more, angry for its Lord. After Allah 
mentioned the severe punishment for the disbelievers, He mentions what He has prepared for His believing servants. He says: @) And 
Paradise will be brought near to the righteous, not far, And Paradise will be brought close for those who were mindful of their Lord 
by fulfilling His commands and refraining from things he did not allow. They will see all the blessings within it, without it being far 
from them. @ [It will be said], “This is what you were promised - for every returner [to Allah] and keeper [of His covenant] It will be 
said to them: “This is what Allah promised every one of you who frequently repents to his Lord and upholds whatever his Lord made 
obligatory upon him.” @ Who feared the Merciful in private and came with a heart repenting heart. Whoever fears Allah in private, 
where none can see him except Allah, and meets Allah with a pure heart while having frequently turned to Him in humility. @ Enter 
it in peace. This is the Day of Eternity.” It will be said to them: “Enter into Paradise in total safety from everything you dislike. It is a 
day of eternity, one which is everlasting.” jj) They will have whatever they wish therein, and with Me is more. They will have every 
everlasting blessing they desire in it, and I have many more blessings for them that no eye has ever seen, nor any ear has ever heard of, 
nor any heart of man has ever imagined. One of them is seeing Me may I be glorified. 

® Beneficial Points: 1. Allah knows of the good and bad thoughts that cross the hearts. 2. Some of the traits of the people of dis¬ 
belief are: preventing goodness and doubting. 3. Allah is the Just. 


^ o^. te. 9 

LaL^jj\\ ^ oLja5li 
{^} (jJjj \ Ljj 3 \ 


! Qaf WBKSQk 

519 1 


Part 26 | 



















or * 




Xz 




@ How many nations there were which I destroyed 
before these denying idolaters amongst the people 
of Makkah. They searched in the lands hoping to 
find a place to run to, but they did not find it. 

@ In that destruction of the previous nations which 
has been mentioned are a reminder and lesson for 
one who has a heart to understand with, or who 
listens attentively with presence of mind, and not 
absentmindedly. 

@ And I created the heavens and I created the earth 
and whatever is between the heavens and the earth 
in six days, despite My power to create them in one 
moment, and I was not affected by tiredness as the 
Jews say. 

@ So be patient, O Messenger, on what the Jews 
and others say, and pray the Fajr prayer to your 
Lord, praising Him before sunrise, and pray Asr 
before sunset. 

Glorify Him at night and after the prayers. 

@ O Messenger, listen on the day when the angel 
appointed to blow the trumpet a second time calls 
from a close place. 

@ On the day the creation will hear the blast of 
the resurrection, in truth without any doubt. That 
day which they will hear it in is the day the dead 
will come out of their graves for the accounting and 
resurrection. 

@ It is I who gives life and death. There is nobody 
to give life and death besides Me. And to Me alone 
is the return of the servants on the day of judgment. 

@ On the day the earth will break away from them, 
then they will come out quickly. That is an easy 
gathering for Me. 

@ I know best what these deniers say. And you are not imposed on them, O Messenger, to force them to accept faith. You 
are only a conveyer of what Allah has ordered you to convey, so remind through the Qur’an he who fears my warning 
to the disbelievers and the sinful, because the fearful is the one who takes advice and takes reminders when reminded. 










Qaf 


520 


Part 26 


The Scattering Winds (Surah A1 Zariat) 

® Themes of the Surah: 

It focuses on informing the creation of their source of provision, Allah, so that they run towards Him and establish ser¬ 
vitude for Him. 

® Explanation: 

CfJ) Allah swears by the wind which scatter dust, 

CjjS And by the clouds that carry plenty of water, 

CJJ) And the ships which sail in the sea with ease, 

CJj) And by the angels which distribute the matters of the servants which Allah has ordered them to distribute. 

C| ’ The reckoning and reward which Allah promises you is true without doubt. 

{J} And the reckoning of the servants is going to occur on the day of judgment without doubt. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Taking heed from historical incidents is the way of those who have understanding hearts. 

2. Allah’s creating the universe in six days is due to wisdom which Allah knows, perhaps one of them being to explain 
the practice of doing things gradually. 

3. The disrespect of the Jews in describing Allah with tiredness after He created the heavens and the earth. This is disbe¬ 
lief in Allah. 























jg} And Allah swears by the sky which has path¬ 
ways. 

(JJ} O people of Makkah, you are in a contradicting 
and conflicting speech. Sometimes you say: The 
Qur’an is magic, at times you say poetry. And you 
say: Muhammad is a magician at times, and some¬ 
times that he is a poet. 

@ Turned away from faith in the Qur’an and the 
Prophet (peace be upon him) is he who he is turned 
away from it in Allah’s knowledge, due to His 
knowing that he will not believe, and so he is not 
enabled to be guided. 

@ Cursed are these liars who said regarding the 
Qur’an and their Prophet what they said. 

@ Those who are in ignorance and absentminded 
of the abode of the afterlife, not caring about it. 
@ They ask: “When is the day of reward?” whilst 
they do not work for it. 

@ So Allah answers their question: the day they 
will be punished on the fire. 

@ It will be said to them: “Taste your punishment. 
This is what you used to mockingly ask for quickly 
when you used to be warned of it”. 

@ Those who are mindful of their Lord by carrying 
out His commands and refraining from His prohibi¬ 
tions will be in gardens and running springs on the 
day of judgment. 

@ Taking the generous reward their Lord has given 
them. Before this generous reward, they used to do 
good in the world. 

@ They used to pray at night, not sleeping except 
a little. 

@ And at the time of morning they seek forgive¬ 


ness from Allah for their sins. 

@ And in their wealth is a right for the beggar amongst people and the one who does not ask out of shyness, and so 
people deprive him of charity. 

And in the earth and the mountains, seas, rivers, trees, plants and animals that Allah has placed in them are proof of 
Allah’s power for those who have conviction that Allah is their Creator and Fashioner. 

And in your own selves, O people, are proof of Allah’s power; do you not see to take lessons? 

@ And in the heavens is your worldly and religious provision, and in it is the reward of this world and the afterlife you 
are promised, {j) By the Lord of the heavens and earth, the resurrection is true without any doubt, just as there is no doubt 
in your speech when you speak, (jp O Messenger, has the story of the guests of Abraham (peace be upon him) - the angels 
whom he honoured - come to you? (ij) When they came to him and said, *’Peace”. Abraham said in reply: “Peace”, and he 
said to himself: “These are people we do not recognise”. (Sjjj) Then he moved to his family secretly, then he brought from 
them a whole fat calf, thinking them to be humans. @ He then put the calf close to them and addressed them softly: “Do 
you not eat the food presented to you?” (Sj) When they did not eat, he concealed his fear of them, but they understood this 
and said to him to put him at ease: “Do not fear. We are messengers from Allah”. And they informed him of what will 
please him, i.e., that he will have a son who will have a lot of knowledge. The one regarding whom glad tidings were 
given was Isaac (peace be upon him). (!j§) When his wife heard the glad tiding, she came screaming out of happiness and 
slapped her face, and said in surprise: “Will an old woman give birth when she is actually barren?” The angels said to 
her: “What we have informed you of is what your Lord has said. And there is nobody to refute what he said. It is He who 
is Wise in His creating and decreeing, Knowing of His creation and what is in their interests”. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Doing good actions and making them sincerely for Allah is a means of entry into Paradise. 2. Part of the etiquette of 
hosting guests is to reply to greetings in a better manner, presenting the spread of food discreetly, preparing for the guests 
before they arrive, not excluding anything from the spread of food, taking care to present it and do so quickly, putting it 
close to the guest and speaking to them softly. 















| So^)Jcs> £*y^ 0 c^d? C^t 

'^yj* <x? 0^^ ^ y <j ^ 



($) %Cy <y^"^ jQ C^) j^Jod\ 

j^5j*\ yy^0c^i^\^^y^ sk^iy^ y? 

^llSS (y^J^As^y \^$ ( £* ) lJ {j&j < 2 * 14 ^'JL^aXpJS 

b£- 

I ^ X O ^ ^ j ** ^ ^ ^ o ^ >/ 

t^J^l^===> > 4 ^ 1 ( 3 ^ O^- o 


k>€; 


@ Abraham (peace be upon him) said to the an¬ 
gels: “What is you case? And what do you intend?” 

@ The angels said in reply: “Allah has sent us to a 
criminal people who commit despicable sins. 

^) So that I can send upon them stones of hard clay. 

(@) Marked in your Lord’s presence, O Abraham, 
and sent upon those who transgress the limits of 
Allah and who go to the extreme of disbelief and 
sins”. 

@ So I took out whoever was in the city of the 
people of Lot from the believers, so that the punish¬ 
ment which will befall the criminals will not befall 
them. 

(Sjj) But I did not find in their city besides one house 
of the Muslims, which was the household of Lot 
(peace be upon him). 

@ And I left in the city of Lot signs of punishment 
which will show that punishment befell them, so 
that those who fear the painful punishment which 
afflicted them take lessons from it and then not do 
what they did 

And in Moses, when I sent him to Pharaoh with 
clear miracles and proof, is a sign for the one who 
fears the painful punishment. 

(^) But Pharaoh turned away from the truth, and he 
said regarding Moses (peace be upon him): “He is 
a magician that does magic on people or a madman 
who says what he does not understand”. 

@ So I seized him and all of his armies, then threw 
them in the sea, so they were drowned and de¬ 
stroyed. And Pharaoh will be held accountable for 
his blameworthy actions- denial of the message and 
his claim of divinity. 

@ And in Ad, the people of Hud, is a sign for one who fears the painful punishment, when I sent upon them the wind 
which does not carry rain or pollinate trees, nor were there any blessings in it. 

((j) It did not leave any soul, wealth or anything else it came upon, except that it destroyed it and left it like scattered ruins. 
(Sjp And in Thamud, the people of Salih (peace be upon him), is a sign for the one who fears the painful punishment, when 
it was said to them: “Enjoy yourselves before your life comes to an end”. 

ijp But they were arrogant to the command of their Lord and they were haughty to faith and obedience, so the thunder¬ 
bolt of punishment seized them whilst they were waiting it to come down, as they were promised punishment three days 
before it came. 

((}) So they were unable to repel the punishment that befell them nor did they have any power to defend themselves with. 
(Jj) And I destroyed the people of Noah through flooding before these who have been mentioned. They were a people who 
left the obedience of Allah, so they deserved His punishment. 

And the sky I made and perfected its making with strength, and I am expanding its edges and expanding for My 
servants by increasing provision. 

(S|| And the earth I made prepared for those who live on it, like a spread for them. How excellent a preparer I am when I 
prepared it for them. 

@ And of everything I have created two types, like the male and female, sky and earth, and the land and sea, so that you 
remember the oneness of Allah who created two types of everything and you remember His power. 

So flee from Allah’s punishment towards His reward, by obeying Him and not disobeying Him. I am a clear warner 
to you, O people, of His punishment. 


) LJILs- g- ■ y* 9 ( 0 (1) 9 

($) O\. 4 J^ I 


@ And do not make alongside Allah another deity to worship besides Him. I am a clear warner to you. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Deep, unwaivering faith is of a greater rank than merely submitting outwardly to Allah. 

2. Allah’s destroying the nations that denied is a lesson for all people. 

3. Fear of Allah necessitates running towards Him through good actions, not running away from him. 





















% J 




C>j\ 1^3 e^plP/ 

i^v&$ &>5 ($) c^jlJL^J \s^ Si \j 'l^ 

^ j A2LaJ 1 ojpaJ \j i <3)3j3 4J^\ 6i($) Q^^-3-14 o' 

0 0 



sea™ 

hs^a 




© Like the denial of the people of Makkah, the 
previous nations denied. No Messenger came to 
them from Allah except that they said regarding 
him: “He is a magician or a madman”. 

© Did the predecessors amongst the disbelievers 
and the latter amongst them bequest one another 
to deny the messengers? No, but rather their trans¬ 
gression has united them on this. 

© So turn away from these deniers, O Messenger, 
for you are not blameworthy, as you have conveyed 
to them what you were sent with towards them. 

© And do not let their turning away from you stop 
you from advising them and reminding them, so 
advise and remind them, as reminding is beneficial 
y for those who bring faith in Allah. 

I* © And I did not create jinns and men except for 
My worship alone. I did not create them to make a 
partner for Me. 

© I do not want any provision off them nor do I 
want them to feed Me. 

© Allah is the Provider for His servants, all of 
them are in need of His provision, He is the Su¬ 
preme-Lord, Every Mighty, nothing is outside His 
ability. All of the jinns and men submit to His pow¬ 
er (may He be glorified). 

© Those who wronged themselves by denying 
you, O Messenger, have a share of the punishment, 
like the share of their companions before them, 
which has a fixed time period. So they should not 
ask Me to bring it quicker before its time. 

So destruction and loss is for those who disbe¬ 
lieved in Allah and who denied His messengers, on 
their day, the Day of Judgment, in which they are being promised that the punishment will be sent upon them. 

The Mount (Surah A1 Tur) 


VJA- 3 (“3i 0%$-0>j^ 

fjl0 j f-k CfM 1 0 

0 


A1 Zariat 


523 


Part 27 



® Themes of the Surah: 

The Surah focuses on removing the doubts of those who deny, through presenting evidence and proof, compelling them 
to obey and submit. 

® Explanation: 

© Allah swore by the mountain on which He spoke to Moses (peace be upon him). 

© And he swore by the Qur’an which is a written book 

© On a spread-open paper. © And He swore by the House in the heavens which the angels in the heavens inhabit by 
worshipping Allah. 

© And He swore by the sky. © And He swore by the sea filled with water. © O Messenger, the punishment of your 
Lord will definitely occur on the disbelievers. © There is nobody to repel it from them and save them from it befalling 
them. © The day in which the heavens (or sky) will move violently, in full accordance with the arrival of the Hour. 

© And the mountains will travel from their places. © So destruction and loss on that day will be for those who deny 

the punishment Allah promised the disbelievers. © Those who are in their discourse in falsehood, playing. They do not 
care about resurrection or being raised. © The day they will be pushed with force and harshness towards the fire of hell. 


© And it will be said to them in rebuke, “This is the fire you used to deny when your messengers used to warn you of it. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. All types of disbelief still remain disbelief, even though it may vary from place to place, time to time and from people 
to people. 2. Allah’s testifying to the Prophet’s (peace be upon him) conveying the message. 3. The wisdom behind 
creating jinns and mankind is to establish the worship of all in all its manifestations. 4. The conditions of the universe 
will soon change on the day of judgment. 






























f\,%%J\ 

(^^*>3 O^tlI Z&£^b\ 

U-> \ 9^J^ (Vy) gte>zX^\ 

>£'>*<'*:<* 9 n ,, 


* ■ 


>«. 


C' 

b$5 


^Xa 




y* 

? 

>>-§i 



>>£LuaO^^ 

I ^ ^ L^Ac'4J^\ 

j / _ > ^ 2 i AJ^vplj^ f p t^) L-)tl)j 


&i| 


<0 Is this punishment which you see magic, or are 
you not seeing it? 

|j| Taste the heat of this fire and suffer it. Be patient 
over suffering its heat or not; your patience or im¬ 
patience is all the same. You will not be rewarded 
today except with the disbelief and sins you used to 
commit in the world”. 

After Allah mentioned the reward of the deniers, 

He mentioned the reward of those who accepted 
and were Mindful. 

@ Those who are mindful of their Lord by carrying 
out His commands and refraining from His prohibi¬ 
tions will be in gardens and a great pleasure which 
will never end. 

@ They will be enjoying the pleasures of food, 
drink and marriage that Allah will have given them, 
and their Lord (may He be glorified), protected 
them from the punishment of hell. Hence, they 
were successful through achieving their desired 
pleasures and by being protected from difficulties. 

It will be said to them: “Eat and drink of what 
your souls desire, in satisfaction without fearing 
harm or pain from what you eat and drink, as a re¬ 
ward for your excellent actions in the world”. 

(j|) Reclining on adorned thrones which have been 
lined up, and I will marry them to fair women with 
beautiful wide eyes. 

@ And those who brought faith and whose chil¬ 
dren followed them in faith - I will join their chil¬ 
dren with them so that they are pleased with them, 
even though they did not reach their actions. And I 
will not decrease anything from the reward of their 
actions. Every person will be held for the bad ac¬ 
tions he earned; nobody else will bear any of his actions. 

@ And I will provide these people of Paradise with different fruits and I will provide them with all the meat they desire. 
{J} They will give to one another cups of wine, bearing no resemeblness to the wine of this world, free from intoxication 
and that which arises from it, such as false speech. 

(S§P And servants will circle amongst them, as though they are protected pearls. 

Sj) The people of Paradise will turn to one another, asking each other about their condition in the world, 
j They will respond to them: “We were, in the world amongst our families, fearful of Allah’s punishment. 

@ So Allah favoured us by guiding us to Islam, and He protected us from the punishment which is extremely hot. 

(j§) We used to worship Him in our worldly life and we used to pray to Him to protect us from the fire of hell. He is Be¬ 
neficent to His servants and Merciful to them. Part of His beneficence and mercy upon us is that He guided us to faith, 
entered us into Paradise and distanced us from the fire.” 

@ So remind through the Qur’an, O Messenger, for you are not, by the faith and intelligence Allah has favoured you 
with, a soothsayer with visions of jinns nor are you insane. 

@ Do these idolaters say: “Muhammad is not a messenger, but he is a poet whom we await death to seize so we can be 
relieved of him”? 

O Messenger, say to them: “Await my death, and I will await the punishment which will befall you due to denying 


<L> 


me”. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Gathering parents and children in Paradise on one level, even though the actions of some of them were deficient, to 
honour them all so that the happiness is complete. 

2. Nothing disliked occurs due to drinking the wine of the afterlife. 

3. Whoever fears his Lord in his worldly life, He will protect him in the Hereafter. 

















@ Or do their minds tell them to say: “He is a 
soothsayer and insane?” So they combine what 
cannot gather in one person, but rather they are a 
people who trespass the bounds, hence they do not 
return to any sacred law or intellect. 

Or do they say: “Muhammad fabricated this 
Qur’an and nothing has been revealed to him?” He 
has not fabricated it, but rather they are too arrogant 
to have faith in it, so they say: “He has fabricated 
it”. 

@ So let them produce a narrative like it, even if 
it has been fabricated, if they are true in their claim 
that he has fabricated it. 

Or have they been created without a creator to 
create them? Or are they their own creators? The 
existence of a creation without a creator or a cre¬ 
ation which creates itself is impossible, so why do 
they not worship their own creator? 

<§S) Or did they create the heavens and the earth? 
But they do not have conviction that Allah is their 
Creator, if they had been convinced of that, they 
would have declared His oneness and brought faith 
in His Messenger. 

@ Or do they have the treasures of your Lord’s 
provision to give to whom they wish, and prophet- 
hood to give to or stop from whom they want? Or 
are they the controllers and disposers according to 
their wish? 

(jp Or do they have a ladder with which to climb 
to the sky in which they listen to Allah’s revela¬ 
tion which He sends to tell them they are on the 
truth? So let the one who listens amongst them to 
that revelation bring a clear proof to affirm you in 


your claim that you are on truth. 

@) Or does He (may He be glorified) have daughters which you dislike, whilst you have sons which you love? 

@ Or do you, O Messenger, seek a wage from them for what you convey to them from their Lord, due to which they are 
burdened with something they cannot bear? 

@ Or do they have knowledge of the Ghaib, so that they write for people what they learn from the Ghaib and inform 
them of what they want therefrom? 

@ Or do these deniers intend to plot against you and your religion. Trust in Allah, as those who disbelieved in Allah and 
His Messenger are the ones who will be plotted against, not you. 

@ Or do they have a true Allah besides Allah? Pure and exalted is Allah from the partner they attribute to him. None of 
what was mentioned has happened or is even thinkable. 

@ And if they see a piece of the sky falling, they will say: “This is a cloud which is piled up on each other as usual”. So 
they do not take heed or believe. 

@ So leave them, O Messenger, in their stubbornness and denial until they meet their day in which they will be punished, 
which is the day of judgment. 

@ The day when their plot will neither help them a little or a lot, nor will they be helped by being saved from the punish¬ 
ment. dj} And for those who wronged themselves through idolatry and sins is a punishment before the punishment of the 
afterlife: in this life through being killed and imprisoned, and in the Transitory Stage through punishment of the grave. 
However, most of them do not know that, which is why they remain on their disbelief. After Allah explained the falsehood 
of what the idolaters practiced, he ordered His Messenger not to care about them and to be patient upon their denial, so He 
said: Be patient, O Messenger, on the decree of your Lord and His divine law, as you are in My sight and protection. 

And glorify and praise your Lord when you stand from your sleep. @ And at night, glorify your Lord and pray to Him, 
and pray the Fajr prayer after the stars have set due to daylight. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Tyranny is a cause of misguidance. 2. The miraculous nature of the Qur’an is clear from multiple facets. 3. Punish¬ 
ment the Transitory Stage is real. 


























{£} jJLp^2^5\s {^} ^SV^ CJy^j? C 5 ^ 6^> 

($)2£jt^ 2c^\JbA^P(^yfc££J\SjJL^JCX:0 l£^ 4 2dj3 


A^._ «u/9 


’‘^45c£ 


'*05 


L)J 


4*M 


Surah an-Najm (The Star) 

® Themes of the Surah: 

It focuses on the issue of the truthfulness of the 
revelation and the lofty, noble source from where 
it came, to establish the belief in Oneness and to 
refute the belief of idolatry. 

4*} Explanation: 

© He (may He be glorified) swore by the star when 
it descends. 

jj} Muhammad (peace be upon him) the Messenger 
of Allah did not deviate from the path of guidance 
nor did he go astray, but rather he is rightly-guided, 
jj} And he did not speak this Qur’an out of follow¬ 
ing his desires. 

@ This Qur’an is nothing but a revelation which 
Allah revealed to him through the medium of Ga¬ 
briel (peace be upon him) 

Cp An angel of great strength, Gabriel (peace be 
upon him), taught him it. 

(jS) And Gabriel (peace be upon him) is of excellent 
form, so he rose up appearing to the Prophet (peace 
be upon him) in his form in which Allah created 
him. 

(cjj) Whilst he was on the highest horizon. 

@ Then Gabriel (peace be upon him) came close 
to the Prophet (peace be upon him), then he came 
even closer. 

Cfp) So his closeness to him was the distance of two 
bow lengths or even closer. 

@) So Gabriel (peace be upon him) revealed to 
Allah’s servant, Muhammad (peace be upon him), 
what he revealed. 

3 The heart of Muhammad (peace be upon him) did not lie about what his eye saw. 

(@ So do you, O idolaters, argue with him about what he saw on the night he was taken on the journey? 

@) And Muhammad (peace be upon him) had seen Gabriel (peace be upon him) in his true form another time on the night 
he was taken for the journey. @ By the lote tree of the utmost boundary, which is a tree on the seventh heaven. @ By 
this tree is the Garden of Refuge. @ When the lote tree was covered through the command of Allah by something great 
whose true nature only Allah knows. @ The eye of Muhammad (peace be upon him) did not swerve left or right, nor 
did it trespass what was fixed for it. ) Muhammad (peace be upon him) saw on the night he was raised great signs of 
his Lord which show His power. He saw Paradise, hell and other things. @ Have you, O idolaters, seen these idols that 
you worship besides Allah: Lat and Uzza. And Manat, another third one amongst your idols? Tell me do they possess 
any benefit or harm for him? @ O idolaters, do you have boys whom you like, whilst He (may He be glorified) has girls 
which you dislike? {J} This distribution which you made with your desires is an unjust distribution. @ These idols are 
nothing but names without meaning, so they have no share of divine qualities. You and your fathers named them on your 
own part. Allah did not reveal any proof for them. The idolaters do not follow in their belief except assumption and what 
their souls desire from what the satan has adorned in their hearts. And the guidance has come to them from their Lord on 
the tongue of Muhammad (peace be upon him), but they were not guided, (jp Or will man have what he desired i.e., the 
idols interceding with Allah? @ No, he will not have what he desired. For Allah alone is the afterlife and the first [life]; 
He grants of them whatever He wishes and withholds whatever He wishes. How many angels are there in the heav¬ 
ens whose intercession cannot help at all if they were to intend to help someone, except after Allah permits intercession 
for whom He wishes among them and He is pleased with the one being interceded for. Allah will never permit one who 
associates a partner with Him to intercede and He will never be pleased with the one he is interceding for who worships 
him besides Allah. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The Qur’an’s praising the Noble Prophet’s status. 2. The Prophet (peace be upon him) saw Gabriel in his real form. 

3. Intercession does not occur except through two condition: permission for the intercessor and being pleased with the 
one being interceded for. 


Xj±3 \ Si ^ 


an-Najm 


526 





















j ^SCiLJ \ t* ^ 0^5^*^ Oi-^oi 

Si £4i i^3 <jP^ 

^-3 O^i-*^ 05 ($)Q jit 

_^*-u*>-\ (jL^\ C£-^ lA>^ ^ 


]\c 




@ Those who do not believe in the resurrection in 
the afterlife give the angels female names in their 
belief that they are the daughters of Allah. Allah is 
far above what they say. 

@ In giving them female names they have no 
knowledge to base this on. They merely follow 
speculation. Speculation is of no value against the 
truth, to take its place. 

@ So, O Messenger, ignore those who turn away 
from Allah’s remembrance without showing any 
concern for it, and who want only the life of this 
world and therefore do not work for their Hereafter 
because they do not believe in it. 

{j) That which the idolaters say - about giving the 
angels female names - is the limit of their knowl¬ 
edge because they are ignorant. They have not 
reached certainty. Your Lord - O Messenger- knows 
best about those who deviate from the path of truth 
and He knows best about those who are guided to 
its path. Nothing of that is hidden from Him. 

@ To Allah alone belongs whatever is in the heav¬ 
ens and to Him alone belongs whatever is on earth. 
He created, owns and controls all of it. To recom¬ 
pense whose who do evil actions in the world with 
the punishment that they deserve and to repay the 
believers who do good actions with Paradise. 

p Those who stay away from major sins and evil 
wrongs, besides minor sins as these are forgiven by 
leaving out the major ones and by an abundance of 
good deeds. Your Lord, O Messenger, is of vast for¬ 
giveness. He forgives the sins of His servants when 
they repent from them. He, (may He be glorified), 

an-Najm _ 527 _ Part 27 _knew best about their states and affairs when He 

created their father, Adam, from earth and when you were in the wombs of your mothers, being created in one form 
after another. Nothing of that is hidden from Him. So do not claim purity for your souls by praising them and asserting 
their piety. He, (may He be glorified), knows best about those who are mindful of Him, by fulfilling His instructions and 
avoiding His prohibitions. 

@ Have you seen the evil state of the one who turned away from Islam after coming close to it? 

@ He gave a little wealth and then held back, because miserliness was an innate quality in him. Despite this he declares 
his soul to be pure. 

@ Does he have knowledge of the Ghaib and therefore sees and speaks about the Ghaib? 

Or is he fabricating against Allah? Or has this person, who makes up lies about Allah, not been informed about what 
was in the earlier scriptures that Allah had revealed to Moses? 

@ And the scriptures of Abraham who fulfilled everything His Lord tasked him with? 

Cj} That no person will bear the sin of another. 

(SjJ) And that man will only obtain the reward of the action that he did. 

(Sj) And that his action will be openly seen on the Day of Judgement. 

@ Then he will be given the recompense of his action in full without reduction. 

((J) And that to your Lord, O Messenger, will be the return and destination of the servants after they die. 

@ And that He makes whoever He wills happy and makes him laugh, and makes whoever He wills sad and makes him 


ofjH \ ext$ Lj 1 l 

h£- - 9 - - ' 



cry. 

@ And that He causes the living to die in the world and brings the dead to life by resurrection. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Classification of sins as major and minor sins. 

2. Prohibition of claiming purity of self. 















And that He created the two types: Male and 
female. 

@) From a drop when it is placed in the womb. 

@ And that He will undertake to recreate them af¬ 
ter they die for the resurrection. 

(S§j5 And that He enriches whichever of His servants 
He wills by making him the owner of wealth and 
He gives wealth that people take as possessions 
they acquire. 

@ And that He is the Lord of Sirius, the star that is 
worshipped by some idolaters together with Allah. 

@ And that He destroyed the first Ad, who were 
the people of Hud when they persisted in their dis¬ 
belief. 

(jp And He destroyed the Thamud, the people of 
Salih, and did not spare any one of them. 

He destroyed the people of Noah before the Ad 
and Thamud. The people of Noah were more unjust 
and transgressed even more than the Ad and Tha¬ 
mud, because Noah lived amongst them for nine 
hundred and fifty years inviting them to Allah’s 
oneness but they did not respond to him. 

@ He raised the villages of the people of Lot to the 
sky and then dropped them to ground. 

He then covered them with stones after raising 
them to the sky and dropping them to the ground. 

(Sj} So which of the signs of your Lord indicating 
His power do you dispute with, O man, and not take 
a lesson from? 

This messenger that is sent to you is from the 
class of the earlier messengers. 

*7 The Day of Standing has drawn nearer. 

There is no one that can push it back and no one 
to uncover it besides Allah. 

(jp Do you marvel at this Qur’an that is recited to you, that it is from Allah? 
(jjj) And laugh mockingly at it and not cry when hearing its admonitions? 

CjJ Whilst you are neglectful of it, not giving it any attention? 

@ So prostrate to Allah alone, and dedicate your worship to Him. 


1 


OYA 



t-L 







0^i=4 




an-Najm 


528 


Part 27 


The Moon (Surah Al-Qamar) 


® Topic of the Surah: 

It focuses on reminding about the signs and warnings and showing the fate of those who deny them. For this reason, the 
verse {I have made the Qur’an easy to remember, so is there anyone to take heed*} is repeated therein. 

® Explanation: 

jj} The coming of the Hour is close and the moon split in the time of the Prophet (peace be upon him), the splitting of 
which was one of the tangible miracles of the Prophet (peace be upon him). @ When the idolaters see any sign or proof 
of the truthfulness of the Prophet (peace be upon him) they turn away from accepting it and say: The evidence and proof 
we have seen are false sorcery. @ They denied the truth that came to them and followed their desires in this denial. Any 
matter, whether good or bad, will occur to the one who deserves it on the Day of Judgement. @ There has come to them 
reports of the nations that Allah destroyed because of their disbelief and wrongdoing that were sufficient to deter them 
from their disbelief and wrongdoing. |J) What has come to them is complete wisdom to establish the evidence against 
them. The warnings do not benefit a people who do not have faith in Allah and nor in the last day. Since they do not 
follow the right path, leave them, O Messenger, and turn away from them waiting for the day when the angel appointed 
to blow the trumpet will call towards a horrific matter, the like of which was not known by created beings previously. 
Beneficial Points: 

1. Not being affected by the Qur’an is a sign of misfortune. 2. The danger of following desires for the soul in the world 
and the Hereafter. 3. Not taking a lesson from the destruction of the nations is an attribute of the disbelievers. 


























SJsM! 

*&M 


o # 



SAj^r^w- 

i) jlfc i)Jje&\ JjSj dlojs*^* 

jS o/io^ \sj \j jJpIj; j§S ^j> >4^® 

c-UjlJ \ c->^3 ^ ^ 1 4 jj 

0 ^ -k3 \ Is ^ \±^J0 

0c5^- ^ Sr 3 ^ <£Sj*J ^ 

($)J^®££ J^J^O^tJ-^ JiiS(^L^3oj <jUd 



© Their gazes will be lowered. They will come out 
of their graves as if, in their rush towards the place 
of reckoning, they are scattered locusts. 

© Rushing to the caller of that place. The disbe¬ 
lievers will say: This day is a hard one, because of 
the difficulty and horrors therein. 

After Allah mentioned the disbelievers’ turning 
away from the call of our Messenger (peace be 
upon him), He informs him that the previous na¬ 
tions also rejected their messengers, as a consola¬ 
tion to him. He said: 

© Prior to these people who rejected your invita¬ 
tion, O Messenger, the people of Noah also denied. 
They denied My servant, Noah (peace be upon 
him) when I sent him to them. They said about him: 
He is insane, and they rebuked him with various 
forms of swearing, abuse and threats if he did not 
stop inviting them. 

© Noah called unto His Lord saying: My people 
have overwhelmed me and they did not respond to 
me. So take retribution from them by a punishment 
that you send down on them. 

@ So I opened the doors of the sky to continuous 
torrential water. 

© I burst open the ground and it became springs 
from which water gushed. The water coming down 
from the sky met with the water gushing from the 
ground for a matter that Allah had determined in 
eternity. Everyone was drowned besides those 
whom Allah saved. 

© I carried Noah on a vessel that had planks and 
nails and I saved him and those with him from 
drowning. 

© This vessel was sailing on the clashing waves of water under My gaze and protection, as a victory for Noah whose 
people denied him and rejected what he brought from Allah. 

@ I have left this punishment that I meted out to them as a lesson and admonition. Is there anyone to take a lesson from 
that? 

© How was my punishment to those who denied? How was my warning that I will destroy them? 

© I have made the Qur’an easy to remember, so is there anyone to take heed of the lessons and admonishment that it 
contains? 

© Ad denied their prophet, Hud (peace be upon him). So reflect- O people of Makkah - how was my punishment to 
them? And how was my warning to others about their punishment? 

© I sent on them a severe cold wind on a day of evil and misfortune that will continue with them until they arrive in Hell. 
© It picked up people from the ground and threw them on their heads as if they were the trunks of date-palms uprooted 
from their plantations. 

© So reflect- O people of Makkah - how was my punishment to them? And how was my warning to others about their 
punishment? 

© I have made the Qur’an easy to remember, so is there anyone to take heed of the lessons and admonishment that it 
contains? 

© The Thamud denied what their messenger, Salih (peace be upon him) warned them about. © They condemningly 
said: Shall we follow a human from our species, who is alone? If we follow him in this state, we will be astray from what 
is correct and will be in difficulty. © Has revelation been sent down to him, whilst he is just one person, and has he been 
chosen for it instead of all of us? No, in fact he is an imperious liar. © They will soon come to know on the day of judg¬ 
ment who the imperious liar is, Salih or they? © I will take out a she-camel from the rock and send it as a test to them. 
So wait, O Salih - and watch what they do to it and what is done to them, and be patient over their harm. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. It is acceptable in the sacred law to make a prayer against a disbeliever who persists in disbelief. 2. The deniers’ being 
destroyed and the believers’ being saved is a divine custom. 3. The memorization of the Qur’an has been made easy. 


)Jo 9 <3^ Ac*OD C-h .&& jlc 


Al-Qamar 


Part 27 





















< -£sii< 


S' ''C^ 9 ^ 

6j^-J As’X-oyP 


?0{ 
^ i^- 


I^Oj 


ij AI-^ 0^- c3^ ^l>u^L>^^Ac' 

_^33 Ujl; 1 C2i Jo\ j2V$(™)^Jj J* 

}jb Xj ($| 'Jyi£-ZJ> o\ jS \^Zj^>C^> (™L> ^i5 


Ij^li jj2>j(Q )jcj (j)Ao 
^h }\£^yf\ Ui=>i 0 ji _ci-^ y^xJ\ 

jy£tf j 
I ^)j -xa^a!^L>. ^ \£j 3 


jg} Tell them that the water of their well is divided 
between them and the she-camel: one day for it and 
one day for them. Each turn will be attended by its 
owner alone on the day allocated to him. 

@ They then called their companion to kill the 
she-camel and he took a sword and killed it, fulfill¬ 
ing the instruction of his people. 

(Sj) So reflect- O people of Makkah - how was my 
punishment to them? And how was my warning to 
others about their punishment? 

@ I sent on them a single blast which destroyed 
them and they became like dry trees that are used 
by a person who makes a fence for his sheep. 

{§} I have made the Qur’an easy to remember, so 
is there anyone to take heed of the lessons and ad¬ 
monishment that it contains? 

@ The people of Lot denied what their messenger. 

Lot (peace be upon him) warned them about. 

{§} I sent on them a wind that threw stones on them 
except the family of Lot (peace be upon him). The 
punishment did not afflict them, as I had rescued 
them from it as he had travelled away with them 
before the punishment came down in the last part 
of the night. 

{§} I rescued them from the punishment as My fa¬ 
vour upon them. I give a recompense similar to the 
one I gave to Lot to those who are thankful to Allah 
for His favours. 

(SjS) Lot warned them of My punishment but they 
disputed with one another about his warning and 
they rejected it. 

{§} Lot’s people tried to tempt him to give them ac¬ 
cess to the angels who were his guests with the in¬ 
tention of doing an indecent act. I obliterated their eyes so they did not see them and I said to them: Taste my punishment 
and the result of My warning to you. 

In the morning a punishment came to them, which will remain with them until they come to the afterlife and its pun¬ 
ishment will come on them. 

@> It will be said to them: Taste My punishment that I sent down on you and the result of Lot’s warning to you. 

@ I have made the Qur’an easy to remember, so is there anyone to take heed of the lessons and admonishment that it 
contains? 

fjp) My warning came to the people of Pharaoh on the tongue of Moses and Aaron (peace be upon them). 

(jp They denied the proof and evidence that came to them from Me, so I punished them for their denial thereof with the 
punishment of a Mighty One whom none can overpower, a Powerful One who is not unable to do anything. 

@ Are your disbelievers, O people of Makkah, better than those disbelievers mentioned: The people of Noah, the Ad, 
the Thamud, the people of Lot and Pharaoh and his people? Or do you have immunity from Allah’s punishment that has 
been brought by the heavenly scriptures? 

@ Or do these disbelievers from the people of Makkah say: We are all together and well-defended against those who 
have evil designs against us and who wish to break up our unity? @ The group of these disbelievers will be defeated and 
they will turn their backs before the believers. This occurred on the day of Badr. @ In fact, the Hour that they deny is the 
appointed time when they will be punished. The Hour is more severe and bitter than the punishment of the world that they 
received on the day of Badr. (j§p Those who are guilty of disbelief and sins are astray from the truth and in punishment and 
difficulty. {jp On the day when they will be dragged in the Fire on their faces and it will be said to them in rebuke: Taste 
the punishment of the Fire. {J} I have created everything in existence with a prior determination from Me, in accordance 
with My knowledge and what I had written in the Preserved Tablet. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The punishment includes those who commit the crime as well as those who go along with them in it. 2. Being thankful 
to Allah for His favours is a means of safety from the punishment. 3. The Qur’an’s informing us of the defeat of the 
idolaters on the day of Badr before it occurred was miracle of the Ghaib. 

















@ My matter when I intend something is only that 
I say one word, which is: ‘Be,’ and what I intend 
quickly becomes like the twinkling of an eye. 

I had destroyed the likes of you in disbelief from 
the previous nations. Is there anyone who will take 
a lesson from this and desist from his disbelief? 

IfjS) Everything the servants do is written in the 
books of the guardian angels, whom nothing es¬ 
capes. 

Every small and big action or statement is writ¬ 
ten in the books of deeds and in the Preserved Tab¬ 
let, and they will be recompensed for it. 

(jp Those who are mindful of their Lord through 
fulfilling His instructions and refraining from His 
prohibitions will enjoy in gardens and in flowing 
streams. 

@ In an assembly of truth, in which there will 
be no futility or sin, by a Sovereign Who owns 
everything, a Powerful One Who is not unable to 
do anything. So do not ask about the perpetual bliss 
they will receive. 

The Merciful (Surah Al-Rahman) 


® Topic of the Surah: 

It focusses on informing about Allah’s remarkable 
favours and the apparent effects of His mercy in 
the world and the Hereafter, encouraging faith and 
warning against rejection. 

® Explanation: 

j The Merciful one, possessor of vast mercy. 

(JfJ) He taught the Qur’an to people by making its 
memorization easy and facilitating the understand¬ 


ing of its meanings. 

Cp He created man perfectly and formed him in the best manner. 

Cp He taught him how to express what is within himself in speech and writing. 

CP He fixed a perfectly calculated course for the sun and moon, to teach people the number of years and calculation. 

|. Plants that do not have a stem and trees prostrate to Allah, (may He be glorified), in submission and surrender to Him. 
(|$) He raised the sky above the earth as a roof for it. He established justice on earth and instructed His servants with it. 
Cp He established justice so that you, O people, are not unjust and deceitful in weighing and measurement. 

(Sj) Maintain the weighing justly between yourselves and do not give short weight or measure when you measure or weigh 
for others. 

C§D He prepared the earth for the creation to settle on it. 

@ It contains trees that produce fruit and date-palms that have receptacles that split open to reveal clusters. 

@ It contains grain with straw like wheat and barley and the different types of grain that you have been provided as food. 
It contains plants whose fragrances you find to be pleasant. 

Cp Which of Allah’s numerous favours to you, O group of Jinn and men, do you deny? 

Cp He created Adam (peace be upon him) from dried clay that has a clatter like that of baked clay. 

Cp He created the father of the jinn from a flame that is pure of smoke. 

C§C Which of Allah’s numerous favours to you, O group of Jinn and men, do you deny? 

@ Lord of the sun’s two points of rising and its two points of setting in winter and summer. 

@ Which of Allah’s numerous favours to you, O group of Jinn and men, do you deny? 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The necessity of believing in predestination. 

2. The writing of deeds whether small or big in the book of deeds. 

3. The status of justice in Islam. 

4. Allah’s favours require us to recognise and be grateful for them, not to deny and reject them. 

























m y 

yi 


l"JO 






•u 


1 

'^^ > Cy ‘^'0 oQ^3 C^3 1 $\ «■ 

I 0(^\j 


@ Allah mixed the two seas, the salty and the 
sweet, that converge as far as the eye can see. 

((jp Between them is a barrier that prevents each one 
of them from transgressing over the other so that 
the sweet remains sweet and the salty remains salty. 

(jp Which of Allah’s numerous favours to you, O 
group of Jinn and men, do you deny? 
jp From these seas pearls and coral emerge, 
jp Which of Allah’s numerous favours to you, O 
group of Jinn and men, do you deny? 
jp He, (may He be glorified), alone has control of 
the ships that sail on the oceans like mountains. 

(jP Which of Allah’s numerous favours to you, O 
group of Jinn and men, do you deny? 

@ Every creation that is on the surface of the earth 
will inevitably perish. 

jp The face of your Lord, O Messenger, the One 
of greatness, kindness and bounty for His servants, 
will remain and will never perish, 
dP Which of Allah’s numerous favours to you, O 
group of Jinn and men, do you deny? 
jp The angels in the heavens and the jinn and men 
on earth ask Him for their needs. Every day he 
brings about a matter from the affairs of His serv¬ 
ants such as giving life, death, provision etc. 
jp Which of Allah’s numerous favours to you, O 
group of Jinn and men, do you deny? 

(jp I will attend to your reckoning, O men and jinn, 
and I will recompense each one with the reward or 
punishment he deserves. 

dp Which of Allah’s numerous favours to you, O 
group of Jinn and men, do you deny? 
jp Allah will say on the Day of Judgment, when He 
gathers jinn and men: O group of jinn and men, if you are able to find for yourselves an exit from one part of the heavens 
and earth then do so. You will never be able to do so except with power and evidence, and where do you have that? 

(jp Which of Allah’s numerous favours to you, O group of Jinn and men, do you deny? 

(Sj) A flame of smokeless fire will be sent on you, O men and jinn, and smoke without a flame, and you will not be able 
to protect yourselves. 

(jp Which of Allah’s numerous favours to you, O group of Jinn and men, do you deny? 

jp When the sky will split open for the angels to descend from it and it will be red like molten lead or the like due to the 
terror of the day of judgment. 

(jp Which of Allah’s numerous favours to you, O group of Jinn and men, do you deny? 

(jp On that great day no man or jinn will be asked about their sins, because Allah knows their deeds. 

|jp Which of Allah’s numerous favours to you, O group of Jinn and men, do you deny? 

dP The guilty ones will be recognised on that day by their mark, which is the blackness of their faces and the blueness of 
their eyes. Their forelocks will be tied to their feet and they will be thrown into Hell. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The meeting of the salty and sweet sea without mixing is one of the manifestations of Allah’s power. 

2. The proof that all created things will perish and showing that permanence is only for Allah. 

3. Establishing the attribute of wajh for Allah in the meaning that is appropriate for Him without any resemblance or 
likeliness. 


I 0 y^=rJS\S^i | 


Al-Rahman 


532 


Part 27 


~w 














1PL 








Js.-M 


& LS3/) \c iSVi 

CS3j ^ ^ c5^(^q^^V^($)oC^C^5 
oQ0\&5 ^ 


Qb 


laj^i 




@ Which of Allah’s numerous favours to you, O 
group of Jinn and men, do you deny? 

@ It will be said to them in rebuke: This is the 
Hell that the guilty ones used to reject in the world, 
which is before their eyes and which they are una¬ 
ble to deny. 

|§p They will go between it and water that is ex¬ 
tremely hot. 

@ Which of Allah’s numerous favours to you, O 
group of Jinn and men, do you deny? 

@ Those who fear to stand before their Lord in the 
Hereafter, and therefore have faith and do righteous 
deeds, will have two gardens. 

<0 Which of Allah’s numerous favours to you, O 
group of Jinn and men, do you deny? 

<3 These two gardens will have huge fresh branch¬ 
es producing fruit. 

@ Which of Allah’s numerous favours to you, O 
group of Jinn and men, do you deny? 

@ In the two gardens there will be two springs 
flowing between them with water. 

@ Which of Allah’s numerous favours to you, O 
group of Jinn and men, do you deny? 

@ In them there will be two types of every fruit 
to enjoy. 

{§} Which of Allah’s numerous favours to you, O 
group of Jinn and men, do you deny? 

@ Reclining on spreads, whose inner lining will be 
of coarse silk, and the fruits that they will reap from 
the two gardens will be close and within reach of a 
person standing, sitting or reclining. 

@ Which of Allah’s numerous favours to you, O 
group of Jinn and men, do you deny? 

In them there will be women who will restrict their gaze to their husbands, whose virginity was not broken by any 
man or jinn before their husbands. 

® Which of Allah’s numerous favours to you, O group of Jinn and men, do you deny? 

As though they are rubies and coral in their beauty and purity, 
fp Which of Allah’s numerous favours to you, O group of Jinn and men, do you deny? 

The reward of those who properly followed their Lord is only that Allah will give them a proper recompense. 

Which of Allah’s numerous favours to you, O group of Jinn and men, do you deny? 

Below those two mentioned gardens are another two gardens. 

Which of Allah’s numerous favours to you, O group of Jinn and men, do you deny? 

Both of the deepest green. 

Which of Allah’s numerous favours to you, O group of Jinn and men, do you deny? 
p In these two gardens there are springs that forcefully gush forth with water. The gushing of their water does not stop, 
jp Which of Allah’s numerous favours to you, O group of Jinn and men, do you deny? 

In these two gardens there are abundant fruit, huge date-palms and pomegranates. 

Which of Allah’s numerous favours to you, O group of Jinn and men, do you deny? 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The diversification of punishment of the disbelievers. 

2. The importance of the fear of Allah and thinking of the awe of standing before Him. 

3. The recompense is according to the deed. 


ojcj Vet di 0 1 






E)<J 


•D £ 




Al-Rahman 


Part 27 

























C>\j X^=Ci La$o_5 6^ ^ 




t^^y^= ====K ^ c ' 0 o^ >\j======G US^4j J^«- 

{^ol^-^oU^o j ^l\£ V_^ (^) o cj^>— 


mm& 


£il 






© In these four gardens there are women with 
good characters and beautiful faces. 

© Which of Allah’s numerous favours to you, O 
group of Jinn and men, do you deny? 

© Houris covered in tents as protection for them. 

© Which of Allah’s numerous favours to you, O 
group of Jinn and men, do you deny? 

© Before their husbands no man or jinn has come 
close to them. 

© Which of Allah’s numerous favours to you, O 
group of Jinn and men, do you deny? 

© Reclining on cushions covered with green cov¬ 
ers, and beautiful carpets. 

© Which of Allah’s numerous favours to you, O 
group of Jinn and men, do you deny? 

© The name of your Lord, the Possessor of majes¬ 
ty, favour and bounty over His servants, is great and 
full of goodness. 

The Event (Surah Al-WaqPah) 

® Themes of the Surah: 

It focusses on reminding about the Day of Judg¬ 
ment, its definite occurrence and the states of the 
people on that day. 

® Explanation: 

© When the inevitable rising will occur. 

© There will be no soul that denies it like how it 
used to deny in the world. 

© It will bring the sinful disbelievers low by enter¬ 
ing them into the Fire, and it will raise the mindful 
believers high by entering them into Paradise. 

© When the earth is shaken violently. 

© And the mountains are completely crushed. 

© Due to this crushing they will become scattered dust. 

© You will be in three categories on that day. 

© The people of the right hand, who will receive their books in their right hands. How high and great will be their rank! 
© The people of the left hand, who will receive their books in their left hands. How despicable and wretched will be 
their ranks. 

© Those who were foremost in doing good deeds in the world they will be foremost in the afterlife to enter Paradise. 
© They are the ones who will be brought close to Allah. 

© In gardens of delight, they will enjoy different types of delight. 

© A group from this nation and from previous nation. 

© A few people at the end of time will be the foremost ones that are brought close. 

© On couches woven with gold. 

© Reclining on these couches facing one another and no one will look at the back of another. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The denial of the disbelievers will end when they see the scenes of resurrection. 

2. The magnitude of the incidents that will accompany the resurrection. 

3. The different levels of the people of Paradise is in accordance to their differing deeds. 




Al-Waqi‘ah 


534 


Part 27 

























0 V 1 0 Ij 

I 1 L(^tb9.A^i)\^9Lfc\cijJstf f 
l^Ja 4_^X12j ^) 0>_>Nj V^lf- O^X^aJ^ ^) | 

1 _|^ l yS^ £(”) o^5j^j oA^^*4. 0 1 


ld&* 








c3Q^) 

(3) ^Jt'^ 0 ow 1 ^^^i0'C'}y^ ^/>0 I 

SI Q^jrLjtr. Jtdr^-j 0 y^ dZ0 ! 


if 


LMJ _ 

uj? uJu\ jJ\ oJyZ ^ y t£ 

• \<re. Zf .^9'-' . ^ A ^ J 


O 


< £ ; L 

OJ/T?d 


x* 

•i/ 


olJ^ ^ ojy^ ^ w&j\ 0 ^ ^ 

^) ($) 'IfjJ^ cx^S^ \ 

Al -Waqi'ah P ^S|^8 ^ 535 Part 27 


3 Children who will never face old age or extinc¬ 
tion will roam around them, to serve them. 

<3 They will roam around them holding handle-less 
jugs, jugs with handles, and glasses of unlimited 
wine that flows in Paradise. 

3 h is not like the wine of the world; it’s drinkers 
will not get headaches nor suffer intoxication. 

3 These children will also roam around them with 
fruits, from which they may choose. 

@ They will also roam around with the meat of 
birds their hearts desire. 

3 They will also have beautiful, wide-eyed wom¬ 
en in Paradise. 

3 Like pearls protected within their shells. 

3 As a reward for the good actions they used to 
do in the world. 

3 They will not hear any foul language in Para¬ 
dise, nor any language that incurs sin. 

3 They will only hear the angels greeting them, 
and the greetings of one another. 

3 And the People of the Right: who are the People 
of the Right? Their rank and status with Allah is 
indeed, great! 

3 They will be among harmless, thornless lote 
trees. 

3 And bananas, neatly arranged in rows with one 
another. 

3 And lengthened, continuous, unmoving shad¬ 
ows. 

3 And flowing water which never stops. 

3 And many fruits that cannot be counted. 

3 They will never finish, because they are not 
seasonal, nor will there be anything that comes in 


between their desire for them at any time. 

3 And raised spreads, spread on the couches. 

M Indeed, I created the aforementioned wide-eyed women in an extraordinary way. 

H I made them virgins, previously untouched. 

3 They are very loving to their husbands, and equal to them in age. 

8 I created them for the People of the Right: those who will be taken towards the right as a sign of their excellence. 

3 They are a group from the nations of the previous Prophets. 

3 And a group from the nation of Muhammad (peace be upon him), which is the last of all nations. 

3 As for the People of the Left: who are the People of the Left? Their state and outcome is indeed, very bad. 

3 They will be among severely hot winds and extremely hot water. 

3 And in the shadow of black smoke. 

3 Neither will it be pleasant, nor will it be a good sight. 

3 Indeed, before they came to the punishment, they were enjoying the luxuries in the world, caring only for their desires. 
3 They used to persist on disbelief in Allah and the worship of idols instead of Him. 

3 They also used to reject the resurrection, and they would say regarding it, mocking it and thinking it to be far-fetched: 
“What, when we die and become dust and decayed and decomposed bones, shall we be resurrected after that?” 

3 “Will our ancient forefathers who died before us also be resurrected?” 

3 O Messenger! Say to these deniers of the resurrection: “Indeed, the earlier generations of people and the later ones 
from them... 

3 “...will soon be inevitably gathered on the Day of Judgement to be taken to account and requited.” 

Beneficial Points: 

1. Good deeds are a means to acquiring blessings in the Afterlife. 

2. The people will be requited differently on the Day of Judgement according to their deeds. 

3. Persisting on sins is dangerous. 















^3 


It 


^ ^ Jt >< £??? 'X^ 4+%.'' J ~i\lZ > 9 'JZ\g+S.< \ °i 
t _ H^-^5 AjoaX^ ' c ( qa ) T U <wj £3' C^X^a> 


£ 

I 

4 * W. 




:~>ou J->&^ 

V 




iQi^P 


si&isS 

t ^ ) ^Wajjp ^\j I^\ c ( $) I 


J? J9^ 


^j\ g-( ^} <l) # rw^ \ C-La3 \ oJU) cA^ ( ^) I’jjV 0 ^s^>r>3 

Aljis t^UJ 4l^Lo-l Ljibj (^) ojjAiJ \ A^ ^y^'cyt 
>3L£i\ 

LalA*^ OjSSjL^A-X^\^- (^ ) \ ‘_^~^\ W^> = f c -^ 

A 


@ Then, O you rejectors of the resurrection and 
deviants from the straight path! 
d|p You shall, on the Day of Judgement, eat from 
the fruits of the tree of Al-Zaqqum, which are the 
worst and most disgusting of fruits. 

@ You will fill your hungry bellied with the fruits 
of that bitter tree. 

(Sj§j) Then you will drink extremely hot water on top 
of that. 

(jp You will drink so much of it, just like a camel 
suffering from a burning thirst drinks. 

(SjP The aforementioned bitter fruit and extremely 
hot water is your hospitality you will be received 
with on the Day of Requital. 

@ O rejectors! I created you from non-existence, 
so why do you not believe I will resurrect you after 
you have died? 

(ljj|) O people! Do you not see the semen you ejacu¬ 
late into the wombs of your wives? 

{§} Is it you that creates that semen, or am I the one 
who creates it? 

@ I determine death between you; each one of you 
has a fixed amount of time which he neither goes 
beyond nor falls short of. I am not incapable... 

@ ...of changing the fonn and appearance that you 
currently hold, and recreating you into a form and 
appearance that you do not know of. 

@ Verily, you know how I created you initially, so 
do you not take heed and realise that the being who 
created you in the first place, is capable of resur¬ 
recting you after you die? 

((§p Do you see the seeds you plant in the earth? 

(jp Are you the ones who make that seed grow, or 
am I the one that makes it grow? 

@ If I wish to ruin that crop, I can do so after bringing it close to ripening and harvest. You would then be left shocked 
at what affected it. 

jjj) You would say, “Indeed, we lost everything we spent, and we have been punished.” 

@) “Rather, we have been deprived of sustenance.” 

(jp Do you see the water you drink when you are thirsty? 

(j§) Are you the ones who cause it to fall from the clouds in the sky, or am I the one who sends it down? 

(jj) If I wanted to make that water extremely bitter, such that it would be of no use for drinking nor for irrigation, I would 
have done so. Will you then not be grateful to Me for sending it down as palatable and a mercy for you? 

@ Do you see the fire that you ignite for your interests? 

|jp Are you the ones who make the trees you ignite it with, grow, or am I the one who causes it to grow, being kind to you? 
@ I am the one who made this fire for you as a reminder to you of the fire of the Afterlife, and I made it a means of 
benefit for the travellers among you. 

(jp O Messenger! So glorify your great Lord, of everything that in unbefitting of Him. 

@) Allah takes an oath on the positions of the stars and their orbits. 

And indeed, taking an oath of these orbits is a great thing - if only you were to understand its greatness-, because there 
are uncountable signs and lessons in it. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The initial creation is a proof of the obvious ease of resurrection. 

2. Sending down rain, causing the earth to grow and fire from which people benefit, are all blessings that require people 
to be grateful for, because Allah is capable of taking them away whenever He wishes. 


14e>4r'| 


Al-Waqi‘ah~ 


536 


Part 27 























to 




@ O people! Indeed, the Qur’an that is recited to 
you is a noble Qur’an, because of the great benefits 
that it contains. 

{jp It is in a record preserved from the eyes of peo¬ 
ple, i.e. the Preserved Tablet. 

@ Only the angels, pure of sin and defects can 
touch it. 

It is a revelation from the Lord of the creations, 
on His Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him), 
(jp O idolaters! Do you then reject this speech, and 
not believe in it? 

dj§S> And do you show your gratitude to Allah for the 
blessings He has provided you with, by rejecting 
Him and attributing the rain to the setting of stars, 
by saying, “It rained upon us due to the setting of 
so and so star”. 

(jp Why not, when the soul reaches the throat... 

(jp ...and at that time, you see the dying person in 
front of you... 

@ ...whilst My angels are closer to the dying per¬ 
son than you are, but you do not see them... 

Why then, if you are not going to be resurrected 
- as you claim - for requital... 

<^p ...return this soul that is leaving your dead, if 
you are truthful? You cannot do it. 

(jp As for if the dying person is one of those who 
hasten towards good... 

{jp ...he will be in such comfort after which there 
will be no tiring, good sustenance and mercy. He 
will have a Paradise in which he will live in luxury, 
enjoying whatever his soul desires. 

((jp And if the dying person is from the people of 
the right. 

(jp Do not worry about their condition, because they will be in peace and security. 

{§p And if the dying person is from the rejectors of what the Messenger (peace be upon him) brought: the deviators from 
the straight path... 

@ ...then he will have some hospitality presented to him, which will be extremely hot water. 
j§p And he will have to burn in the fire of hell. 

O Messenger! Indeed, the stories I have narrated to you are convincingly true, in which there is no doubt. 

(jp So glorify the great name of your Lord, and proclaim His purity from all defects. 


^ ^ ^ '"'s'*'' ^ X 

^ , ^ ^ ^ ^ S'‘ X. 9 r& 

d> D(oUSjj ^Ijt 

(^) dip I 




.Mg 


A 

Al-Waqi‘ah 




Part 27 



The Iron (Surah Al-Hadld) 


® Themes of the Surah: 

Emphasis on building material and spiritual strengths which assist in calling to Allah and striving in His path, whilst 
liberating the souls from obstacles. That is why the mention of charity and faith is repeated in this Surah. 

® Explanation: 

Cp) Every creation of His in the heavens and the earth proclaims the glory and purification of Allah. He is the almighty 
whom no one can overpower; the Wise in His creation and His measure. @ To Him alone belongs the kingdom of the 
heavens and the earth. He gives life to whoever He wishes to give life to, and causes death to whoever He wishes to cause 
death to. He is capable of everything; nothing is outside His ability. @ He is the First; nothing existed before Him. He is 
the Last; nothing will exist after Him. He is the Apparent; there is nothing above Him. He is the Intimate; there is nothing 
without Him, and He knows everything, He does not miss anything. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Belief that celestial bodies have an effect in rainfall is an act of disbelief and one of the habits of the times of ignorance. 

2. The principle is that humans cannot see the angels except if Allah wishes due to some wisdom. 

3. The ranks of the believers differ according to their deeds. 





























(yj) He is the one who created the heavens and the 
earth in six days, starting from Sunday and finish¬ 
ing on Friday, yet He is capable of having creat¬ 
ed them in less than the duration of the blinking 
of an eye. He then rose over His Throne as befits 
Him (may He be glorified). He knows everything 
that enters the earth, i.e. every drop of rain and 
every seed etc.; He knows everything that emerg¬ 
es from it, i.e. every shoot, mineral etc.; He knows 
everything that descends from the sky i.e. rain, rev¬ 
elation etc., and He knows everything that ascends 
to it i.e. angels, souls and deeds of the servants etc. 

And He is with you wherever you are O people, 
in terms of His knowledge: nothing is hidden from 
Him and He sees everything you do. None of your 
actions are hidden from Him, and He will requite 
you for them. 

( J) To Him alone belongs the kingdom of the heav¬ 
ens and the earth, and to Him alone return all af¬ 
fairs. He will then take the creations to account on 
the Day of Judgement and requite them for their 
deeds. 

He enters the night into the day and so the dark¬ 
ness arrives and people sleep; He enters the day 
into the night and so the light arrives and people 
go about their business. He is aware of everything 
that the hearts of His servants contain; none of it is 
hidden from Him. 

(JJJ) Bring faith in Allah and bring faith in His Mes¬ 
senger, and spend from the wealth that Allah has 
made you deputies in, using it according to what 
Allah has legislated for you. As for those of you 
who have faith in Allah and spend their wealth in 
His path, for them is a great reward with Him, which is Paradise. 

(Sj) And what stops you from bringing faith in Allah, when the Messenger is calling you towards Allah hoping that you 
bring faith in your Lord (may He be glorified), and Allah has taken a covenant from you that will believe in Him when 
He took you out from the loins of your fathers? If you believe in that, then believe! 

^ He is the one who sends down clear verses upon His servant Muhammad (peace be upon him), to take you out of the 
darkness of disbelief and ignorance, into the light of faith and knowledge. And indeed, Allah is kind and merciful to you 
that He sent His Prophet to you as a guide and a bearer of glad tidings. 

And what is stopping you from spending in the path of Allah, when the treasures of the heavens and the earth belong 
to Allah? O believers! Those of you who spent their wealth in the path of Allah seeking His pleasure before the conquest 
of Makkah and fought the disbelievers in aid of Islam, are greater in rank according to Allah and higher in status than 
those who spent their wealth in His path and fought the disbelievers after the conquest of Makkah. However, Allah has 
promised both groups Paradise, and He is aware of your actions; none of them are hidden from Him and He will soon 
requite you for them. 

@ Who is there that will spend his wealth for the pleasure of Allah happy at heart, so that Allah may grant him a multitude 
of reward for the wealth he has spent, on top of the noble reward of Paradise he will receive on the Day of Judgement? 

Beneficial Points: 

1. Wealth belongs to Allah. Humans have only been made as caretakers of it. 

2. The believers differ in rank according to precedence in faith and acts of piety. 

3. Spending in the path of Allah is a means of attaining blessings and increase in wealth. 


jyhi ' ^ 

\ ^ u* 


















@ On the day when you will see the believing men 
and women, with their light ahead of them and to 
their right. It will be said to them on that day, “Your 
glad tidings today are of gardens under the palaces 
and trees of which rivers flow, and in which you 
will live forever. That reward is the great success, 
that cannot be equalled by any other.” 

After Allah mentioned the state of the believers on 
that day, He mentions the state of the hypocrites, 
saying: 

@ On the day when the hypocrite males and fe¬ 
males will say to those who brought faith in Allah 
and His Messenger: “O believing men and women! 
Wait for us; perhaps we can take a flare of your light 
that will help us cross the Bridge?” It will be said to 
the hypocrites, mocking them: “Turn back and find 
the light which you can use for yourselves!” A wall 
will then be placed between them which will have a 
door; the inner side on which the believers are will 
have mercy in it, while the outer side on which the 
hypocrites are will have the punishment. 

@ The hypocrites will call out to the believers, say¬ 
ing: “Were we not with you upon Islam and obe¬ 
dience?” The Muslims will reply: “No, you were 
with us, but you deceived your souls with hypocri¬ 
sy and doomed them, and you anticipated that the 
believers are defeated so you can then announce 
your disbelief. You also doubted in the help of Al¬ 
lah coming for the believers and in the resurrection 
after death. False ambitions also deceived you, un¬ 
til death came to you whilst you were chasing them, 
and Satan also deceived you about Allah.” 

@ O hypocrites! Today no ransom will be accept¬ 
ed from you from the punishment of Allah, nor from those who disbelieved in Allah openly, and your outcome and the 
outcome of the disbelievers is the hellfire. It is most deserving of you, and you are most deserving of it; how bad an 
outcome it is! 

jjj) Has not the time come for those who have faith in Allah and His Messenger that their hearts soften and become tran¬ 
quil through the remembrance of Allah (may He be glorified), and through the promises and warnings that have been 
revealed in the Qur’an? Has the time not come that they do not become like the Jews who were given the Torah and the 
Christians who were given the Gospel, in terms of their hearts hardening? This was due to the period prolonging between 
them and the era of their Prophets. The majority of them left the obedience of Allah, going into His disobedience. 

(Sj§) Know that indeed, Allah revives the earth by causing it to grow after it has dried up. O people! Verily Allah has clearly 
explained the proof and evidence of His capability and oneness, so that perhaps you may understand them and know that 
the one who revives the earth after its death is also capable of resurrecting you after your deaths, and is capable of making 
your hearts soft after they have become hard. 

@ Indeed, those men who spend some of their wealth, and those women who spend some of their wealth, spending it 
with happiness of heart and without recounting favours or causing harm, their reward will be multiplied for them. Each 
good deed will be multiplied by ten of its like, up until seven hundred times or more. Together with that, they will receive 
a generous reward from Allah: Paradise. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Allah recounts His favours upon the believers by telling them that He will grant them a light that will shine in front of 
them and from their right sides. 

2. There will be no light on the Day of Judgement for the hypocrites. 

3. Wishing misfortune upon the believers and doubting in the resurrection, together with being deceived by false hopes 
and Satan are some of the traits of the hypocrites. 

4. The severity of heedless from Allah, in that it causes hardnening of the heart. 


















Vj-“ 


Oi 




]y,^==j 'sJ&yJs-A^^Qj- 4|>i-e 

(Jl£ ^4 0 

ij/i tj^ j22T,\Jyj 'j 

ojlkjsj Jo-Ujo\ jkC- tj_J dllai-O^o jlj 

'ay^^\Kfij oy-r^u 4$Cxt 

51 A"y.\\. ifzz i^, 2 ...s vr*:-: .5\VTi a <. 


@ Those who have faith in Allah and in His mes¬ 
sengers without differentiating between them are 
the ones who are the truthful ones. The martyrs 
have their generous reward prepared for them with 
Allah, and they will also have a light which shines 
in front of them and on their right sides on the Day 
of Judgement. As for those who disbelieved in Al¬ 
lah and His messengers and rejected My verses 
that were revealed to My Messenger, they are the 
people of hell which they will enter on the Day of 
Judgement and live within forever, never to come 
out of it. 

(jp Know that the life of the world is only a pas¬ 
time that the bodies play with; futility that the 
hearts engage in; beauty that you adorn yourselves 
with; boasting with one another over possessions 
and power, and taking pride in abundance of wealth 
and offspring. It is just like rainfall that pleases the 
farmers with the growth it brings, but the green 
growth does not last long before it begins to dry. 

Then, O onlooker, you see it after its greenery hav¬ 
ing turned yellow. Allah then turns it into broken 
bits falling apart. And in theAfterlife there will be a 
severe punishment for the disbelievers and the hyp¬ 
ocrites, and a special forgiveness from Allah for the 
sins of His believing servants. 

(jp O people! Hasten towards good deeds i.e. re¬ 
pentance and other actions, through which you will 
achieve forgiveness for your sins. You will also ac¬ 
quire through them a Paradise the width of which 
is the width of the heavens and the earth; Allah has 
prepared this Paradise for those who bring faith in 
Him and His messengers. That reward is a favour 
of Allah that He grants whichever of His servants He wishes; He (may He be glorified) is the bestower of great favours 
to His believing servants. 

(jp No calamity afflicts the people on earth i.e. a drought etc., nor a personal calamity, except that it has been recorded in 
the Preserved Tablet before I created the creations. Indeed, that is easy for Me. 

(jp O people! That is so that you do not grieve over anything you miss out on, and so that you do not show happiness 
that leads to arrogance over every blessing Allah has given you. Indeed, Allah does not love anyone who is arrogant and 
boastful over what Allah has granted him. 

(j|p Those who are miserly in spending whatever is obligatory on them to spend and instruct others to be miserly, are 
losers. Whoever turns away from the obedience of Allah will never harm Allah; he only harms himself. Indeed, Allah is 
the Self-sufficient; He is in no need of the obedience of His servants, and He is praiseworthy in every state. 

<!*} Beneficial Points: 

1. Abstinence from the world and the desires attached to it, together with an eagerness in the Afterlife and the everlasting 
blessings within it, both help in treading the straight path. 

2. It is necessary to believe in predestination. 

3. One of the benefits of believing in predestination is not grieving over missing out on any shares of the world. 

4. Stinginess and commanding it are blameworthy traits which a believer should not have. 


0 & oj. <3>T 

jjL' ij cyt 
" H *iC-^==t3 {$) oi&Lfc o' 


10 * 


13 \ 


Al-Hadld 


540 


Part 27 
















+>XX\\ 




Ot\ 




; \3y\j y^ixlAjB^d & 


\£J& $ 3 % 



|jS) Verily I sent My messengers with clear evidence 
and manifest proof, and sent down books with them 
and the balance, so that people would uphold jus¬ 
tice. I also sent down iron in which there is great 
strength; armour is made from it, together with it 
having many other benefits for the people in their 
manufacturing and handicrafts. And also because 
Allah can make it obvious to the people who it is 
that supports Him and His messengers in secret. 
Indeed, Allah is Strong and Almighty; nothing can 
overcome His decree nor is He incapable of doing 
anything. 

@ And verily I sent Noah and Abraham peace be 
upon him as messengers, and placed messengership 
in their offspring; I did not send any Prophet ex¬ 
cept from their progeny, giving them the revealed 
books; I only revealed books to a messenger from 
their progeny. So from their progenies are those 
who were rightly guided to the straight path and are 
successful, but the majority of them left the obedi¬ 
ence of Allah. 

@ Then followed them up with my messengers and 
I sent them one after the other to their nations. I sent 
after them Jesus the son of Mary and gave him the 
Gospel, placing gentleness and mercy in the hearts 
of those who brought faith in him. They were affec¬ 
tionate and merciful to one another, but innovated 
extremism into their religion and left aside mar¬ 
riage and comforts which I had made permissible 
for them. I did not seek that from them; they made 
it necessary upon themselves and in doing so inno¬ 
vating in the religion. I only sought that they follow 
the My pleasure which they did not do, and so I 
granted those who believed from them their reward. However, the majority of them left My obedience by rejecting what 
My Messenger Muhammad (peace be upon him) brought to them. 

|jjS) O those who have faith in Allah and act upon whatever He has legislated for them! Be mindful of Allah by fulfilling 
His commands and refraining from the things He has not allowed; He will give you double the reward for your bringing 
faith in Muhammad (peace be upon him) and in the previous messengers. He will also create for you a light through 
which you will be guided in your worldly life and which you shall use on the Bridge on the Day of Judgement. He will 
also forgive your sins and not take you to account for them. And Allah is the bestower of great favours to His servants; 
no limiter can limit His favour, nor can anyone count it. 

@ O believers! Verily I have clearly explained My great favour I have prepared for you in the multitude of rewards, so 
that the people of the previous Book i.e. the Jews and Christians know that they cannot access any of the favour of Allah 
in terms of being able to give it to whomsoever they wish, and so that they also know that true favour is in Allah’s Hands 
(may He be glorified); He grants it to whomsoever He wishes. And Allah is the bestower of great favours, which He 
exclusively gives to whichever of His servants He wishes. 

^ Beneficial Points: 

1. The status of justice in the divine religions is mentioned. 

2. Being related through blood to the people of faith and piety does not help a person at all, as long as he himself is not 
a believer. 

3. The prohibition of innovation in religion is mentioned. 


\yZ\e- 


Al-Hadid 


541 


Part 27 





















She That Disputes (Surah Al-Mujadilah) 


| sLtdiliO 


Ot Y 




gja&a 



^ a 9 ^ - T . .. 9 

i»SU4=4i'5ls 






rx ^ 


>U ^3V 
SJ1 




• *> 


Osly*J. jpJL£|l^4 02 0 


0/-6^ 


£ 


® Topic of the Surah: 

Emphasis on making the all-encompassing, deep 
knowledge of Allah clear, with the aim of devel¬ 
oping His consciousness and warning against His 
disobedience. 

® Explanation: 

{J} O Messenger! Verily Allah has heard the words 
of the woman (She was Khawlah bint ThaTabah) 
who was discussing the issue of her husband with 
you (who was Aws ibn Al-Samit) after he had done 
Zihar to her. She was complaining to Allah about 
what her husband had done to her, and Allah was 
listening to your exchange of words; nothing is hid¬ 
den from Him, indeed, He is The Hearing of the 
speech of His servants and The Seeing of their ac¬ 
tions; none of them are hidden from Him. 

{$} Those who do Zihar to their wives, by saying to 
them: “You are for me like the back of my mother”, 
have lied in this statement of theirs. Their wives 
are not their mothers; their mothers are only those 
women who gave birth to them, and when they 
make such statements they are uttering a disgust¬ 
ing, false statement. But indeed, Allah is overlook¬ 
ing and forgiving: He has legislated an atonement 
for you to free you of the sin. 

{J} It is necessary upon those who utter this dis¬ 
gusting statement and then intend to have sexual 
intercourse with the wife they did Zihar to, that they 
make amends by freeing a slave before they have 
intercourse. This aforementioned ruling you have 
been commanded to carry out is a reprimand for 
you for the Zihar. And Allah is aware of your actions; none of your actions are hidden from Him. 

@ So whoever cannot find a slave to free, it is necessary upon him to fast for two months consecutively before he has 
sexual intercourse with the wife he did Zihar to. Then, whoever is incapable of fasting for two months consecutively, 
should feed sixty poor people. This command I have given is so that you believe that Allah is the one who has command¬ 
ed you with it and so you carry it out. These rulings that I legislate for you are My limits I have set for My servants, so 
do not trespass them. As for those who disbelieve in the commands of Allah and the limits He has set, they will face a 
painful punishment. 

© Indeed, those who regard Allah and His Messenger to be their enemies will be humiliated and exiled, just as the people 
of the past who regarded them as enemies were humiliated and exiled. Verily I have revealed clear verses, and those who 
disbelieve in Allah, His Messenger and His verses will face a humiliating punishment. 

© On the day when Allah will resurrect them all, not leaving any of them out. He will then inform them of their shameful 
actions in the world which He recorded against them. He misses none of their actions, yet they themselves will forget 
them but find them having been recorded in their books of deeds, which leave no small or big deed unrecorded. And Allah 
is aware of everything; none of their actions remain hidden from Him. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Allah is kind to the weak among His servants, because He helps them and lessens the obligation of worship on them. 

2. The supplication of an oppressed person will be accepted, even though it may be after a while. 

3. Zihar is one of the major sins, because it is effectively prohibiting that which Allah has made permissible. 


jSjJl \j£ 


































Ot 




^ \ S^J \ ^UjXio olS^3' 

4 1 ^AS <£_&£■ 

La i==^3j diis ^ 

c^\ yiyy ^ 0j*-^p 6 ^u£sj \yyzyp 

y^L?~\ a? yyy ) ^ oj^^j 03 *^15 

j (J^- 5 V-oV^U^\ V271S 4j^\ Aj 

\S^\a 

yW 5 ^ Olj^ilj y^i ^ ^jjzpy^ 

til) j,(^) VS ^ U^53i$ l 5>^ IjL^ 

^l^5($) '^yy \j »^ = a jXAs 4ii\ 4j^ O iS-i 

<^^p»ciij£j^3 j^sin^v^ ^ij\ 

a&\ ^ji yyy z> yyy yyyy$ ^ 4$ 
^yyyyyc^o [^yyy ^^yyyy yy yyy 

1 ^§ |~AT-Mujadilah 



Part 28 


@ O Messenger! Do you not see that Allah knows 
everything that is in the heavens and everything on 
Earth; nothing within them is hidden from Him? No 
three people talk among themselves except that Al¬ 
lah (may He be glorified) is the fourth among them 
through His knowledge; nor do five people talk 
among themselves except that He may He be glo¬ 
rified is the sixth among them through His knowl¬ 
edge; nor any less or any more than these numbers, 
except that Allah is with them through His knowl¬ 
edge wherever they may be. No speech of theirs re¬ 
mains hidden from Him; He will then inform them 
of their actions on the Day of Judgement. Indeed, 
He knows everything; nothing is hidden from Him. 

O Messenger! Do you not see the Jews who 
used to secretly whisper when they would see a be¬ 
liever, then Allah prohibited them from such whis¬ 
pering, but they would return to committing exact¬ 
ly that which Allah prohibited them from: secretly 
discussing sin among themselves i.e. backbiting the 
believers, inciting people against them, and disobe¬ 
dience to the Messenger. O Messenger! When they 
come to they greet you with a greeting Allah has 
not taught you to greet with, i.e. by saying: ‘As- 
samu ‘alayk’ meaning ‘death be upon you’, and 
they say, rejecting the Prophet (peace be upon him): 
“Why does Allah not punish us for what we say? 
Because if he was truthful in his claim that he is a 
Prophet, Allah would have punished us for what we 
say about him!” Hell is enough of a punishment for 
them for what they say; they will definitely suffer 
its heat. What an evil outcome they will face! 


jjp O those who have faith in Allah and act upon what He has legislated for them! Do not secretly discuss things that incur 
sin, incite enmity against, or disobedience to the Messenger, in case you become like the Jews. Rather, discuss things that 
lead to obedience to Allah and refraining from His disobedience. And be mindful of Allah by fulfilling His commands 
and refraining from the things He has not allowed, because He alone is the one towards whom you will be gathered on 
the Day of Judgement for accountability and requital. 


@) Secret discussions that contain sin, inciting enmity and disobedience to the Messenger are only the result of Satan 
adorning and whispering to his associates, so that he can cause grief to the believers that they are being plotted against. 
However, neither Satan nor his beautification of things will harm the believers in any way, except if Allah wills and in¬ 
tends it. So it is upon Allah that the believers should rely in all their affairs. 


@ After Allah mentioned the etiquette of speech. He mentions the etiquette of gatherings, and says: O those who have 
faith in Allah and act upon what Allah has legislated for them! When you are told: “Make space in gatherings”, then make 
space; Allah will create ease for you in your worldly lives and in the afterlife. And when you are told: “Leave from so and 
so gathering so that people of virtue may take part in them”, leave those gatherings; Allah (may He be glorified) will raise 
in great stature those who have faith among you and those blessed with knowledge. And Allah is the knower of whatever 
you do; none of your actions are hidden from Him, and He will requite you for them. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Allah’s, may He be glorified, knowledge is vast. 

2. Three people should not have a private conversation leaving one person out, because that could cause him grief by 
thinking they are talking about him. 

3. Satan invites towards evil and discord between the hearts of people. 

4. From the etiquettes of a gathering is that you create space for others in them. 

5. requital is of the same nature as the deed: whoever wishes for a good requital should do good deeds. 





















6^1? a^-J o|J 4^13^45^ SXXs XX 
^ cX x a: cy^y^y^ o ^X2 ajl ^ ^0 

oj^\^p\cj o^XX 2 ^ CI 5 VS 3 

] liX OjX \ ^LjjX^jULoP^^AX— t^\j jXjX^ 

\y&\j* '(VSijJQ 4 X XA 05X"^jfe 

X4 ^> ax x4>ftAiA^l? X^0oxx*> 

j^S^.c^ 0 oh^ C 5 ^ 


^ ^i' 


'4c- 


@ O those who have faith in Allah and act upon 
what He has legislated for them! When you intend 
to talk privately with the Messenger, give some 
charity before you talk in private with him. That 
giving in charity will be better and purer for you 
because of being an act of obedience to Allah that 
purifies the hearts. But if you do not find anything 
you can give in charity, there is no harm in you talk¬ 
ing in private with him, because Allah Forgiving of 
the sins of His servants and He is merciful towards 
them by not burdening them except with what they 
are capable of. 

(jp Do you fear poverty by presenting charity be¬ 
fore talking privately with the Messenger? So when 
you do not do that which Allah commanded you to 
do, and Allah forgave you by allowing you not to 
give in charity, now perform prayer to perfection, 
give Zakat on your wealth, and obey Allah and His 
Messenger. Allah is aware of your actions; nothing 
is hidden from Him and He will soon requite you 
for them. 

|§p O Messenger! Do you not see the hypocrites 
who befriend the Jews whom Allah is angry with 
due to their disbelief and sins? These hypocrites are 
neither from the believers nor from the Jews; rather, 
they are uncertain between the two: neither are they 
on one side nor the other. Yet they will swear that 
they are Muslims and that they did not relate infor¬ 
mation about the Muslims to the Jews, but they are 
liars despite their oaths. 

Allah has prepared a severe punishment for 
them in the afterlife, where He will enter them into 
the lowest depths of the hellfire. Indeed, the acts of 
disbelief they commit in the world are shameful. 

@ They take the oaths they swear as protection against being killed due to disbelief, by outwardly showing Islam to 
protect their lives and wealth. So they turn the people away from the truth by belittling and hindering the Muslims. There¬ 
fore, they will face a humiliating punishment which will humiliate and shame them. 

@ Their wealth and their offspring will not benefit them in the slightest. They are the people of the hellfire who will enter 
it and reside in it for ever, the punishment never stopping on them. 

(Sj| Remember the day when Allah will resurrect them all for requital, not leaving any of them out. They will swear in 
front of Allah that they were not upon disbelief nor hypocrisy; rather they were only believers who acted in accordance 
to the pleasure of Allah. They will take oaths in front of Him in the afterlife just as they would take oaths in front of you, 
O believers, in the world that they were believers. They will think that by taking these oaths in front of Allah they will be 
in a position to bring some benefit to themselves or prevent some harm falling upon themselves. Know well that indeed, 
they are true liars in their oaths in the world and in the afterlife. 

(Sjj Satan has taken control over them and through his whispers, has made them forget the remembrance of Allah, so they 
do not act to earn His pleasure, but only do those things that incur His wrath. They are the party of Iblls and his followers. 
Know well that indeed, the party of Iblls and his followers are the losers in the world and the afterlife, because they have 
sold guidance in exchange for deviance, and Paradise for the hellfire. 

(Sj| Indeed, those who regard Allah and His Messenger as enemies are some of the ones whom Allah will humiliate in the 
world and the afterlife, and the ones who are the most dishonourable from the disbelieving nations. 

(Jj) Allah has decreed in His prevailing knowledge that He and His messengers will definitely be victorious over His 
enemies with strength and evidence. Indeed, Allah has the power to help His messengers, and is the Almighty who can 
take retribution from His enemies. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Uncertainty and not being able to stand firm on one position is one of the traits of the hypocrites. 2. Swearing an oath 
to something that is a lie is a gravely reprehensible. 3. From the divine customs of Allah is that He will grant victory to 
those of Faith, a custom which never changes, however delayed it may seem. 


XX 510 Xj 

0 jAa A?® s '03x3 



Al-Mujadilah 


544 

















0 to 




^ J 3 ^ J&ek. j\z \^=Sj jQy^JJ *Ui \ 


*J 


dy?&S0 lod^st) 'ddjydd- 


d^S^ <^y(3 \ j^d^k-^dd 

^■' 3 My*0 

l 3 jdgJ& ^(oi4^4*^ 

o^JiO. 

[^w 


@ O Messenger! You will not find a people be¬ 
lieving in Allah and in the Day of Judgement, who 
love and befriend those who regard Allah and His 
Messenger as enemies, even though these enemies 
y of Allah and His messengers happen to be their fa¬ 
thers, sons, brothers, or tribe members they affil¬ 
iate themselves to. This is because faith prevents 
them from befriending the enemies of Allah and 
His Messenger, and because the connection of faith 
is greater than all connections, so it is to be giv¬ 
en priority at times of conflict. Those who do not 
befriend the enemies of Allah and His Messenger 
- even if they are their own relatives - are the ones 
in whose hearts Allah has established faith such 
that they do not waver, and has strengthened with 
His proof and light. He will also enter them on the 
Day of Judgement into everlasting gardens, under 
the palaces and trees of which rivers flow, and in 
which they shall live forever, without its luxuries 
ever finishing or them ever becoming extinct. Al¬ 
lah is pleased with them to a degree that He will 
never be displeased with them afterwards, and they 
are also pleased with Him because of Him having 
given them favours which will never finish, one of 
which is the ability to see Him may He be glorified. 
They are the party of Allah that fulfils whatever He 
commands and refrain from the things He does not 
allow. Know well that indeed, the party of Allah are 
the ones who will succeed by achieving their ob¬ 
jective and remaining safe from their fears in the 
world and the afterlife. 


Al-Hashr 


545 


Part 28 


The Gathering (Surah Al-Hashr) 

® Themes of the Surah: 

This Surah depicts the absolute power and might of Allah in rewarding those with Faith with mutual harmony amongst 
themselves, in constrast to those who reject Faith. 

® Explanation: 

{JS Every creation in the heavens and the earth proclaims the purity and sanctity of Allah from everything that does not 
befit Him. He is the Almighty whom no one can overcome, the Wise in His creation, legislation and decree. 

(Sj) He is the one who exiled the Banu an-Nadlr who had disbelieved in Allah and rejected His Messenger Muhammad 
(peace be upon him), from their houses in Al-Madlnah the first time towards the Levant region. They were from the 
Jews: the people of the Torah. After they had broken their treaty and sided with the idolaters against the Messenger, He 
exiled them towards the Levant. O believers! You did not think they would leave their homes because of the might and 
strength they possessed, and they themselves thought that their fortresses they had fortified would protect them from 
the might of Allah and His punishment. Then, the might of Allah came upon them in a manner they did not anticipate, 
when He commanded His Messenger to fight them and exile them from their homes. Allah also put extreme fear into 
their hearts, and they began demolishing their homes with their own hands from the inside so that the believers could not 
take advantage of them, while the Muslims demolished them from the outside. O people of insight! So take heed of what 
befell them due to their disbelief and do not be like them, in case you get the same requital as they did, and face the same 
punishment they faced. 

(Sj) Had it not been that Allah had decreed exile for them, He would have punished them in the world with execution and 
captivity, like He did with their brothers from the Banu Quraydah. And for them in the afterlife is the punishment of the 
hellfire that awaits them, wherein they shall live forever. 

Beneficial Points: 

1. Faith in Allah contradicts befriending His enemies. 

2. The connection of faith is the strongest of connections between the people of faith. 

3. Faith in Allah is the cause of success in the world and the afterlife. 




















| | 


oi V 




^ ,4 0 ^ *£ 

JoAJa/ 4^Lj^L^JL^l> 

*J*z^====*Jij\ ajlj {yjjtS+alzZ La (^} ' 
$jft *Lj^ L> 9 f 4jL JjisLsl^^o^ 

4j^\j ^LJi^ ^ aV-Lj JolL^ 4jL ^^55 

j c_y^^ L(^)^rji 

4^^ <4^ <2y^ cS^Vj 

ijlyJ>-3 i}^)^J^=C^\ «. 14 j ^ 4 - 5 . i£j£^^oy. %j^ 



o^iS^*^ !3j3^ ji \ j< £p od© 0 i' 




(yJS) Whatever happened to them happened because 
they took Allah and His Messenger as enemies 
through their disbelief and breaking of the treaties. 

And whoever takes Allah as his enemy, Allah is se¬ 
vere in punishment, so he will soon suffer His sever 
punishment. 

C§5 O believers! Whatever date palm you cut down 
to infuriate the enemies of Allah in the battle of the 
Banu an-Nadlr, or you left it standing with its trunk 
to make use of it, was done with the command of 
Allah; it was not done to cause destruction on earth 
like they claimed. It was also done so that Allah 
could humiliate through it those who left the obe¬ 
dience of Allah from the Jews: those that broke the 
treaties and chose the path of treason over the path 
of loyalty. 

jj} And whatever wealth of the Banu an-Nadlr Al¬ 
lah returned to His Messenger, you did not haste in 
seeking it through riding on horses or camels, nor 
did you face any difficulty in acquiring it. Rather, 

Allah gives power to His Messenger over whatever 
He wishes, and He has given power to His Messen¬ 
ger over the Banu an-Nadlr such that he conquered 
their communities without any fighting. And Allah 
is capable of everything, Nothing is outside His 
ability. 

@ Whatever wealth of the people of the villages 
Allah favoured His Messenger with without a fight, 
is for Allah: He can give it to whoever He wishes; 
it is also for the Messenger to own; for his relatives 
from the Banu Hashim and the Banu Al-Muttalib in 
compensation for the charity they have been pre¬ 
vented from accepting; for the orphans; the needy 
and the foreigner whose ration has run out. This distribution is so that the wealth is not only confined to the rich rather 
than the poor. O believers! Whatever wealth of the Fay’ the Messenger gives you, take it, and whatever he does not allow 
you to take, then refrain from it. And be mindful of Allah by fulfilling His commands and refraining from the things He 
has not allowed. Indeed, Allah is severe in punishment, so fear His punishment. 

dj} Apart of this wealth will be spent on the needy who migrated in the path of Allah and were forced to leave their wealth 
and offspring, hoping that Allah will confer His grace upon them by providing for them in the world and by becoming 
pleased with them in the afterlife. They also help Allah and His Messenger by striving in the path of Allah, they are the 
ones who are truly firmly grounded in faith. 

jjS> After Allah mentioned the migrants and praised them, He mentions the Helpers and praises them also, saying may He 
be glorified: And those Helpers who inhabited Al-Madlnah before the Migrants and chose to bring faith in Allah and His 
Messenger, they love those who migrated to them from Makkah and do not feel any anger or jealousy towards those who 
migrated in the path of Allah when they are given any of the Fay’ whilst not being given anything themselves. They give 
priority to the Migrants over themselves in worldly shares, even though they themselves are needy and poor. Whoever 
Allah saves from the greed of his own self for wealth, and he spends it in His path, they are the ones who are successful 
by achieving whatever they hope for and gaining salvation from whatever they fear. 

Beneficial Points: 

1. Treating Allah and His Messenger as enemies is a direct cause of incurring loss in the world and the afterlife. 

2. Fay’ has been legislated and its avenues of expenditure stipulated. 

3. The Migrant companions and the Helpers are both virtuous. 

4. Giving preference to others is a great trait from the traits of Islam, which manifested itself in the Helpers most beau¬ 
tifully. 






















^JdJ^ cJk*(£)>6^3 
\ Jo\\ J^\ jL^==^_j& 


a 


5 ^($) 

,^j3 j^U^Dip di' 1 j i_i ^ i_J?j ajit 



» / ^ ^ ^ 
Jo 




j oj^^^lSs'^4|g^jg y @ And those who came after these people and 
followed them with righteousness until the Day of 
Judgement, say: “O our Lord forgive us and our 
brothers in religion who preceded us in bringing 
faith in Allah and His Messenger, and do not place 
any grudge or resentment in our hearts for any of 
\&t\^ j*JdU41 Aillun IBT the believers. Our Lord! Indeed, You are kind to 

Your servants and merciful towards them.” 

@ O Messenger! Do you not see those that have 
concealed disbelief and outwardly shown faith, 
saying to their brothers in disbelief from the Jews: 
the followers of the distorted Torah: “Remain in 
your homes because we will never abandon you 
and never give you up. If the Muslims exile you 
from your homes, we will also leave in solidarity 
with you, and we will never obey anyone who pre¬ 
vents us from leaving with you. And if they were 
to fight you, we will definitely help you against 
them.” Allah testifies that indeed, the hypocrites 
are liars in their claims that they will leave with the 
Jews if they were to be exiled, and that they would 
fight with them if they were fought against. 

(jp If the Muslims exile the Jews, they will not 
leave with them, and if they fight them, they will 
neither support nor help them. Even if they go to 
help or support them against the Muslims, they will 
flee from the battlefield, after which the hypocrites 
will never be helped; rather, Allah will humiliate 
and shame them. 

@ O believers! You are more fearful within the 
hearts of the Jews and hypocrites than Allah. Their 
extreme fear of you and feeble fear of Allah is be¬ 
cause they are a people who have no understanding. 
If they had understanding, they would know that Allah is more deserving of being feared, because He is the one who gave 
you power over them. 

@ O believers! The Jews will not fight you united except in dwellings fortified with walls, or from behind walls, because 
they cannot face you due to their cowardice. Their internal might is severe due to their enmity to one another. You think 
of them to be one force and that their pedestal is one, but the reality is that their hearts are divided and conflicting. This 
conflict and enmity is because they do not understand; if they were to understand they would recognise the truth and 
follow it, not dispute in it. 

@ The analogy of these Jews in their disbelief and the punishment that afflicted them, is like that of the idolaters of 
Makkah not so long before them. They tasted the evil consequences of their disbelief, and on the day of Badr many were 
killed and others taken captive. They will also face a painful punishment in the afterlife. 

jjP Their analogy in their listening to the hypocrites is like that of Satan when he beautifies disbelief for the human, then, 
when he disbelieves because of his beautification of it, he says: “I have nothing to do with you after you have disbelieved; 
I fear Allah the Lord of the creations.” 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The connection of faith is not affected by the prolonging of time or the changing of place. 

2. The friendship of the hypocrites is a delusive friendship which disappears at times of difficulty. 






















, U' 
lU 


-l? o ^S 

J%j&£yMjft]p\* dyJtC050o^' 

0 O^a—M\aJ^j\^~ 4ji\ ' • l jVd)i\^ySj\j _\_*K£^° -W 

4^4i^'4^J s^-4^0 oAA^^ 
\1>gA| 0 ^a^i-t 

5^' 



ddt 



@ So the ultimate outcome of Satan and whoever 
followed him will be that they (meaning the fol¬ 
lowed Satan and the human followers of his) will 
be in the hellfire on the Day of Judgement, wherein 
they shall have to remain forever. That requital that 
awaits them is the requital of those who oppress 
themselves by trespassing the limits of Allah. 

(Sjp O those who have faith in Allah and act upon 
whatever He has legislated for them! Be mindful 
of Allah by fulfilling His commands and refrain¬ 
ing from the things he has not allowed. Each soul 
should ponder over what good deeds it has send 
forth for the Day of Judgement. So be mindful of 
Allah; indeed, Allah is aware of your actions, none 
of them are hidden from Him, and He will soon re¬ 
quite you for them. 

@ Do not become like those who forgot Allah by 
not fulfilling His commands nor refraining from the 
things He did not allow, so Allah made them forget 
themselves and they did not act upon that which 
would save them from the wrath and punishment 
of Allah. Those who forgot Allah and did not fulfil 
His commands or refrain from the things He did not 
allow are the ones who left the obedience of Allah. 

(j| The people of the hellfire and the people of 
Paradise are not equal. Rather, they are different in 
their requital just like they differed in their actions 
in the world. The people of Paradise are the ones 
who are successful by having achieved whatever 
they sought and gaining safety from whatever they 
feared. 

@ If I had revealed this Qur’an onto a mountain, 
you would have seen, O Messenger, that mountain, 
despite its solidity, humbled and fearful due to the extreme fear of Allah. This is because of the scolding admonitions and 
severe warnings it contains. These analogies that I draw for the people are so that perhaps they use their intelligence and 
take heed of the lessons and advices its verses contain. 

(jp He is Allah, the one whom there is no true deity except Him; He is the Knower of the absent and the present: nothing 
is hidden from Him; the Benevolent of the world and the afterlife and their Merciful: His mercy encompasses the worlds; 
the Master; the Pure and Sacred from every deficiency; the Faultless from every defect; The Corroborator of His mes¬ 
sengers with manifest signs; the Observer of the actions of His servants; the Almighty whom no one can overpower; the 
Omnipotent who controls everything through His power, the Imperious. Pure and glorified is He from the idols and other 
things the idolaters ascribe to Him. 

(jp ((§p He is the Creator who created everything; the Originator of things; the Fashioner of His creations according to His 
wishes. For Him may He be glorified are the most beautiful names which contain His lofty attributes. Everything in the 
heavens and on earth glorifies Him from every deficiency. He is the Almighty whom no one can overpower; the Wise in 
His creation, legislation and decree. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. It is obligatory to take account of one’s soul in the world before it is taken to account on the Day of Judgement. 

2. Requital on the Day of Judgement will be according to one’s actions. 

3. The Qur’an has a great effect on the soul. 

4. It is obligatory to envision the greatness of the lofty attributes of Allah and His most beautiful names. 




























j 4^U )y^y o^ j^k? 
^0 j-5? jS^O-a a^iAJ^J^ilc-Vtaj 

1 yM\^jp^i\g&zJooJ&&3V& P\ 

O^t^-jso ^y^Ai dyePsh \ ^y 

>''■' y* ° 2 **" 9 y r& 9} 0 ! %- s''^' 

\S L^1^t^Il|. ^-^ => ~ \y^y^ 

lX? *Caj dii OjaJCJ^ 

j <3X5 ^\j5^^c5x£^^53 

o^ Sg Vt -^5 G-jj^V? 


She That is to be Examined 
(Surah Al-Mumtahanah.) 

^*> Themes of the Surah: 

Emphasis on purifying the hearts of the believers 
from affiliation and loyalty to other than the reli¬ 
gion of Allah. 

^ Explanation: 

(jj) O those who have faith in Allah and act upon 
what He has legislated for them! Do not take My 
enemies and your enemies as intimate friends who 
you befriend and love, when they have disbelieved 
in the religion that has come to you at the hands 
of your Messenger. They also drove the Messenger 
out of his home in Makkah, and drove you out of 
your homes in Makkah too. They do not consider 
the bonds of kinship nor blood in your regard; not 
due to anything except that you have brought faith 
in Allah who is your Lord. So if you have truly gone 
out to strive in My path and to seek My pleasure, do 
not befriend them while also secretly sending the 
information about the Muslims, out of your love for 
them. I know better of what you conceal in that re¬ 
gard, and what you disclose; nothing is hidden from 
me in any case. And whoever intimately befriends 
and loves the disbelievers has verily strayed from 
the middle path, deviated from the truth and avoid¬ 
ed that which is right. 

(JJj) If they get their chance, they will disclose the 
enmity they harbour in their hearts towards you and 
will stretch their hands out to you to harm and beat 
you, while swearing and abusing you with their 
tongues. They will also desire that you disbelieve 

in Allah and His Messenger so that you become just like them. 

@ Your ties of kinship will never benefit you, nor your offspring, if you intimately befriend the disbelievers due to them. 
On the Day of Judgement, Allah will separate between you and enter the people of Paradise into Paradise and the people 
of the hellfire into the hellfire, so you will be of no use to one another. And Allah is watchful of your actions; none of 
them are hidden from Him (may He be glorified) and He will soon requite you for them. 

|J) O believers! You have a beautiful example to follow in Abraham (peace be upon him) and the believers who were 
with him, when they said to their disbelieving people: “We have nothing to do with you and the idols you worship instead 
of Allah. We have disbelieved in the religion you are upon; enmity and dislike has become apparent between us and you 
until you bring faith in Allah alone and do not ascribe anyone as partner to Him.” So it is necessary for you to proclaim 
innocence from your disbelieving nation just like they did, except for the statement Abraham (peace be upon him) made 
to his father: “I will definitely seek forgiveness on your behalf from Allah”: do not follow him in that because it was be¬ 
fore Abraham lost hope in his father bringing faith. It is therefore not allowed for a believer to seek forgiveness on behalf 
of an idolater. Neither can you prevent any punishment of Allah coming upon yourself. O our Lord! Upon You we rely in 
all our affairs, to You we return in repentance, and to you is our return on the Day of Judgement. 

{J) O our Lord! Do not make us a trial for the disbelievers by giving them power over us, so they can say: “If they were 
on the truth we would not have been given power over them”, and O our Lord forgive our sins for us, because indeed, You 
are the Almighty who can never be overpowered; the Wise in your creation, legislation and decree. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. It is forbidden to intimately befriend the disbelievers. 

2. The disclose confidential information about the people of Islam to their enemies is a major sin. 

3. The enmity of the disbelievers is a deep-rooted enmity, in which intimately befriending them has no effect. 

4. It is prohibited to seek forgiveness on behalf of those who have died in the state of disbelief. 



















(Sj) This good example is only followed by those 
who have hope for good from Allah in the world 
and afterlife. Those who turn away from this good 
example, then Allah is in no need of His servants. 

He does not require their obedience and He is wor¬ 
thy of praise in every state. 

(Jp Perhaps Allah will bring about affection be¬ 
tween you, O believers, and those disbelievers 
whom you oppose by guiding them to Islam and 
they will become your brothers in religion. Allah 
has power to turn their hearts to faith. Allah Forgiv¬ 
ing towards those of His servants who repent and 
He is merciful towards them, 
djj) Allah does not prohibit you from those who 
have not fought you on account of your Islam, and 
who have not expelled you from your homes, that 
you be good and fair to them by giving them any 
right they have against you. An example of this is 
how Asma bint Abu Bakr Al-Siddiq behaved with 
her disbelieving mother when she came to visit her 
after she had taken permission from the Prophet 
(peace be upon him) for this and he instructed her 
to join family ties. Allah loves those who are just 
to themselves, their families and what they are in 
charge of. 

@ Allah only prohibits you from those who fought 
you on account of your faith, expelled you from 
your homes and aided in your expulsion. He pro¬ 
hibits you from aligning yourselves with them. 

Those of you who align themselves with them, they 
are the ones who wrong themselves by bringing 
them to the point of destruction on account of their 
going against Allah’s instruction. 

@ O you who have faith in Allah, and who act on what He has ordained for you, when believing women come to you as 
emigrants from the land of disbelief to the land of Islam, then test them with respect to the sincerity of their faith. Allah 
knows best about their faith - nothing of what their hearts contain is hidden from Him. If you are sure of their being 
believers after such a test that makes their sincerity apparent to you, then do not send them back to their disbelieving 
husbands. It is not lawful for believing women to be married to disbelievers and it is not lawful for disbelievers to marry 
believing women. Give their husbands the dowry that they paid. There is no sin on you, O believers, if you marry them 
after their waiting period is over if you give them their dowry. The person whose wife is a disbeliever or who turned away 
from Islam, then he should not retain her, because their marriage has terminated by her disbelief. Ask the disbelievers 
for the dowry you paid to your renegade wives and let them ask for the dowry of their wives who accepted Islam. That 
- which has been mentioned about your and their returning the dowry - is Allah’s judgment. He (may He be glorified) 
passes judgment amongst you as He wills. Allah knows the states and actions of His servants. Nothing of that is hidden 
from Him. He is Wise in what He ordains for His servants. 

@ If it happens that some of your women leave you for the disbelievers as renegades and you demand your dowry from 
the disbelievers but they do not give it to you, and thereafter you acquire booty from the disbelievers, then give those 
husbands whose wives left as renegades the equivalent of the dowry they paid. Be mindful of Allah, in Whom you have 
faith, by fulfilling His instructions and avoiding His prohibitions. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. A Muslim must ask Allah for firmness, because hearts are between the two fingers of the Merciful and He turns them 
as He wishes, so that He turns them from disbelief to faith and from enmity to love. 

2. The difference in the law with respect to disbelievers who are at war and those at peace with the Muslims. 

3. The prohibition of marriage to a disbelieving woman, besides one from the people of the scripture, whether this is at 
the outset or during the course of the marriage. The prohibition of a Muslim woman being married to a disbelieving man 
whether this is at the outset or during the course of the marriage. 


Cyt3 rP 

99 99 K 9“* 99 9 —' ^ — '"5 9 ^ 9 i — ,' lf ^ I 

< 0411^09 ajyj a(jyj 

Cjt | 

be ^ ^ be 

ok? 


4 »\ 


















L§ 0^3^ o-4A^ g^& 

J| v^3 ^ 1^ ^ ^ oi^ o 




\ (j^J S& 

0 5^i3£ S) l^jyB 'fS\j^* \ a 6;it Cgs 0 

^[0^ W^cJLj d)\ <aJ^ JC^L^jL* y<£=^ 
jJ^\^====\ 

j ^3 ji 3 0 ijh^- 

\^>\j \^^k===£S\ a$ \y^j (^ 


O prophet, when believing women come to 
pledge allegiance to you - as occurred at the time 
of the conquest of Makkah - that they will not as¬ 
sociate anything as partner to Allah, but they will 
worship Him alone, nor steal, nor commit adul¬ 
tery, nor kill their children in accordance with the 
custom of the people of ignorance, nor attribute to 
their husbands their children from adultery, no go 
against you in any righteous thing such as His pro¬ 
hibition from wailing, shaving off hair and tearing 
garments: - then accept their pledge of allegiance, 
and seek forgiveness for them from Allah for their 
sins after they pledge allegiance to you. Allah For¬ 
giving to those servants of His who repent to him 
and He is merciful to them. 

@ Since the Surah commenced with a warning 
against becoming allies with Allah’s enemies, it 
ends with a warning against the same to reiterate 
what was said previously. Allah said: O you who 
have faith in Allah, and who act on what He has 
ordained for you, do not take as allies a people with 
whom Allah is angry. They do not have conviction 
in the afterlife. Instead they despair of it just like 
their despair of the return of their dead to them, be¬ 
cause they reject resurrection. 

The Column (Surah Al-Saff) 

Themes of the Surah: 

It focusses on motivating the believers to help the 
religion of Allah and to strive in His path. 

^ Explanation: 

(JfJ Whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on 
earth declares the transcendence and purity of Allah (may He be glorified) from everything that is not appropriate for 
Him. He is the Mighty whom none can overpower, Wise in His creating, decrees and laws. 

(jj O you who have faith in Allah, why do you say: ‘We did something,’ when in reality you did not do it?! Like the state¬ 
ment of one of you: “I fought and struck with my sword,’ whereas he did not fight and strike with his sword. 
lj]j) It is a most detested thing to Allah that you say what you do not do. It is only appropriate for a believer to be truthful 
with Allah, and for his actions to confirm his statements. 

dj) Allah loves the believers who fight in His path seeking His pleasure, in rows alongside one another as if they are a 
structure that it tightly compacted. 

(|J) After Allah mentioned fighting and praised the believers who stand tightly together in fighting in His path, He men¬ 
tioned the opposition that the people of Moses and Jesus displayed towards their messengers, as a warning to the believers 
against opposing their prophet, and He said: Remember, O Messenger, when Moses said to his people: O my people! 
Why do you hurt me by going against my instruction when you know that I am Allah’s messenger to you?! When they 
moved away and deviated from the truth that he brought to them, Allah caused their hearts to move away from the truth 
and steadfastness. Allah does not guide to the truth a people who go against His obedience. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The legitimacy of pledging allegiance to the person in charge to hear and obey and to be mindful of Allah. 

2. Obedience to the person in charge is only in acceptable matters. 

3. An evil end usually serves as a result of those whose actions betray their words. 


























oo Y 






{J} Remember, O Messenger, when Jesus son of 
Mary (peace be upon him) said: O Israelites, I am 
Allah’s messenger. He has sent me to you to con¬ 
firm the Torah that was revealed before me. I am 
nothing new among the messengers. I have come 
to give the good news of a messenger who will 
come after me, whose name is Ahmad. When Jesus 
brought the evidence indicating his truthfulness to 
them, they said: ‘This is clear magic, and we will 
never follow you.’ 

@ There is none who is more wrong than the one 
who makes up lies about Allah when he makes ri¬ 
vals for Him that he worships besides Him, whilst 
he is called to Islam, the religion of pure monothe¬ 
ism for Allah. Allah does not guide a people who 
wrong themselves by committing idolatry and sins 
to that in which lies their rectitude and righteous¬ 
ness. 

These deniers want to extinguish Allah’s light 
with the false statements and distortion of the truth 
that proceed from them. Allah will perfect His light 
despite them by making His religion triumph in the 
east and the west of the earth and by raising His 
word. 

Allah is the One Who sent His messenger, Mu¬ 
hammad (peace be on him) with the religion of Is¬ 
lam, the religion of guidance and direction to good, 
the religion of beneficial knowledge and righteous 
action, so that He makes it prevail over all other 
religions despite the idolaters who hate for it to be 
established on earth. 

@) O you who have faith in Allah, and act on what 
He has ordained for you, shall I show and guide you 
to a profitable trade, that will rescue you from a painful punishment. 

@ This profitable trade is that you have faith in Allah and His messenger, and you strive in His path (may He be glori¬ 
fied) by spending your wealth and giving your lives to seek His pleasure. That action is better for you if you know, so 
rush towards it. 

@ The profit of this trade is that Allah will forgive your sins and enter you into gardens under the palaces and trees of 
which rivers flow and He will enter you into pleasant homes in gardens of permanence from which you will not be trans¬ 
ferred. That mentioned recompense is the supreme success to which no other success can come close. 

@ Part of the profit of this trade is another feature that you love, which is immediate in this world, that Allah will assist 
you against your enemy, and He will give you an imminent victory which is the conquest of Makkah and other places. O 
Messengers, tell the believers about the victory that will please them in the world and the attainment of Paradise in the 
afterlife. 

@ O you who have faith in Allah, and who act on what He has ordained for you, become Allah’s helpers by helping His 
religion that was brought by your messenger, just as the disciples provided their help when Jesus (peace be upon him) 
told them: ‘Who will be my helpers to Allah?’ They replied to him at once: ‘We are Allah’s helpers.’ So a group of the 
Israelites believed in Jesus (peace be upon him) and another group disbelieved. Then We supported those who believed 
in Jesus against those who rejected him and they became dominant. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The previous messages brought the good news of our prophet (peace be upon him). 

2. Empowering the religion is a divine practice. 

3. Faith and striving in Allah’s path are means to enter Paradise. 

4. The believer’s recompense from Allah, is sometimes quick and sometimes delayed. 


(jpi£ ry*j (^) t'_ \ AL& 3 \5 l Vj ^ gk 

a 3 i. y) 


Al-Saff 


552 



















"f<? 


c**>c 


^s£te 




The Congregation (Surah Al-Jumuah) 

® Themes of the Surah: 

This Chapter focuses on making apparent Allah’s 
favour on this nation by preferring it over others, 
guiding it with His Messenger after it was once 
misguided as well as containing a warning against 
resembling other than the people of Faith. 
Explanation: 

(Jp All created things in the heavens and all cre¬ 
ated things on earth declare Allah’s transcendence 
and purity from every attribute of deficiency that is 
not appropriate for Him. He is the Sovereign, Who 
is alone in His sovereignty, free from every defi¬ 
ciency, the Mighty Whom none can overpower, the 
Wise in His creating, decree and laws. 

(0) He is the One Who sent amongst the Arabs, who 
could neither read nor write, a messenger from their 
own kind, reciting to them His verses, which He 
revealed to him, purifying them from disbelief and 
bad morals, teaching them the Qur’an and teaching 
them the Sunnah. Prior to his being sent to them 
they were clearly misguided from the truth, as they 
used to worship idols, spill blood and sever family 
ties. 

jjj) He sent this messenger to another people from 
the Arabs and others that have not come yet, but 
who are still to come. He is the Mighty Whom none 
can overpower, the Wise in His creating, laws and 
decree. 

(jj) That which has been mentioned - about sending 
the messenger to the Arabs and to others - is Allah’s 
grace that He gives to whoever He wishes. Allah 
possesses great favour and part of His great favour is the sending of the messenger of this nation to all of mankind, 
jjj) After Allah mentioned His favour by sending the messenger and revealing the Qur’an, He mentions the conduct of 
some of the followers of Moses (peace be upon him) who turned away from practicing on what was contained in the 
Torah, as a warning to this nation against following them, and He said: The example of the Jews who were charged with 
carrying out what was contained in the Torah and who left out what they were charged with, is like that of a donkey car¬ 
rying huge books. It does not know what has been loaded onto it. Is it books or something else? How bad is the example 
of those who deny Allah’s words. Allah does not guide people who do wrong to reach the truth. 

CP Say, O Messenger: O you who have remained on Judaism after it was distorted, if you claim that you are Allah’s 
friends, whom He has specifically chosen as friends to the exclusion of other people, then hope for death, so that He can 
quickly give you the honour He has chosen for you - according to your claim - if you are true in your claim that you are 
Allah’s friends to the exclusion of other people. 

Cp They will never hope for death. Instead they will hope to remain forever in the world because of the disbelief, sins 
and wrong they did and the distortion and changes they made to the Torah. Allah knows those who do wrong. Nothing of 
their actions is hidden from Him and He will give them the recompense for that. 

Say, O Messenger, to these Jews: The death from which you flee will inevitably catch up with you sooner or later. 
Then you will return on the Day of Resurrection to Allah, Who knows everything that is seen or unseen. Nothing is 
hidden from Him. He will then tell you about what you used to do in the world and give you the recompense for that. 
® Beneficial Points: 

1. The state of the Arabs prior to Islam was in ignorance and loss. 

2. The mission of our prophet (peace be upon him) included all men and jinn. 

3. Refutation of the claim made by the Jews that they are Allah’s friends, by challenging them to desire for death if they 
are true in their claim. 


ot p) oi \ QjISJs {^) 

J^0 %X ^\Jol 



























f2^]£&& i 0 

=dji 

Ujst^jls Aj&j 3?4^ 

0 \jt^4$J 3^4)^ ^O^k J-i^'i>?3i®"^ 



XP 




£u3f0oij£4 6 j^%^S^S4^5 

_3>l^= t« ftli^4^1 ^33 t3^-^ o^i? 3^25 


L*4V& 


@ O you who have faith in Allah, and who act on 
what He has ordained for you, when the caller to 
prayer calls out on the day of Friday after the speak¬ 
er ascends the pulpit, then hurry to the mosques to 
attend the speech and the prayer and leave trading, 
so that it does not distract you from obedience. That 
hurrying and leaving out trading after the call for 
the Friday prayer is better for you, O believers. If 
you know that, then fulfil what Allah has instructed 
you to do. 

@ When you have completed the Friday prayer 
then spread out on earth searching for lawful earn¬ 
ings and the fulfilment of your needs, and seek of 
Allah’s bounty by way of lawful earnings and law¬ 
ful profit. Remember Allah abundantly during your 
search for provision and do not let your search for 
provision make you forget Allah’s remembrance, in 
the hope that you will attain what you love and be 
saved from what you fear. 

@ When some Muslims see a trade or entertain¬ 
ment they disperse, going out towards it and leave 
you, O Messenger, standing on the pulpit. Say, O 
Messenger-: The recompense for righteous action 
with Allah is better than the trade and entertainment 
that you go out towards. Allah is the best of pro¬ 
viders. 

The Hypocrites (Surah Al-Munafiqun) 

Themes of the Surah: 

It focusses on exposing the hypocrites and their 
attributes and showing their position on Islam and 
its followers, as a warning against them and resem¬ 
blance to them. 

® Explanation: 

(Sjj) When the hypocrites, who outwardly profess Islam and inwardly conceal disbelief, come to your gathering, O Mes¬ 
senger, they say: ‘We testify that you are truly the messenger of Allah.’Allah testifies that the hypocrites are lying in their 
claim that they testify from the depth of their hearts that you are His messenger. 

CjJ) They have made the oaths that they swear on their claim of faith a cover and protection for them from being killed or 
imprisoned. They turned people away from faith by the doubts and rumours that they spread. Evil is the hypocrisy and 
false oaths that they perpetrate. 

That is because they hypocritically professed faith, but faith did not reach their hearts, and then they secretly rejected 
Allah, so He put a seal on their hearts on account of their disbelief so that faith cannot enter it. Due to this seal they do 
not understand that in which lies their rectitude and righteousness. 

@ When you see them, their appearance and form impresses you, because of the youthfulness and luxury they possess. 
If they speak, you listen to their speech because of its eloquence. As if they are propped-up timber in your gathering, 
O Messenger. They do not understand or pay heed to anything. They think that every sound is targeting them because 
of their cowardice. They are truly the enemy, so be careful, O Messenger, that they do not divulge a secret of yours or 
make a plot against you. May Allah curse them! How are they deluded from faith despite the clarity of its evidence and 
its glaring proof! 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The obligation of rushing to the Friday prayer after the call. 

2. The prohibition of trading after the second call on the day of Friday. 






| 

Al-Munafiqun~ 



























| jjSsL 


OOOj 








3 % 

*> Oj X^jJ£X)j 
13 


3(^5 s-i2_x> 


0 iS^ii^ 4$C>{ 


'oyy*- Jp^^j Oj 

^jr*J \^L====>'^ ^j^sss»S^j\ ^_j 


£i&\ 


m 


< Tf 9^ 


(Jp When these hypocrites are told: Come to the 
Messenger of Allah and apologize for what you’ve 
done, he will seek from Allah forgiveness for your 
sins, they turn their heads in mockery and jest, and 
you see them turning away from what they are in¬ 
structed to do, whilst they are too proud to accept 
the truth and submit to it. 

@ It is the same whether you, O Messenger, seek 
forgiveness for their sins or you do not seek for¬ 
giveness for them. Allah will never forgive their 
sins. Allah does not guide those who go against His 
obedience and who persist in disobeying Him. 

@ They are the ones who say: “Do not spend your 
wealth on those poor people who are with the Mes¬ 
senger of Allah and the bedouins around Madina 
so that they disperse away from him.’’The treas¬ 
ures of the heavens and the earth belong to Allah 
alone. He grants them to whichever servants of His 
He wishes. But the hypocrites do not know that the 
treasures of provision are in His hand, may He be 
glorified. 

© Their leader, Abdullah bin Ubayy, says: If we 
return to Madina, the mighty - which is me and my 
people - will drive out the weak - which is Muham¬ 
mad and his companions. To Allah alone belongs 
all might and to His Messenger and to the believers, 
and not to Abdullah bin Ubayy and his followers. 
But the hypocrites do not know that might belongs 
to Allah and to His Messenger and to the believers, 
(jj) After Allah showed the keenness of the hypo¬ 
crites on holding back from spending in order to 
prevent others from Allah’s path, He warns the be¬ 
lievers against doing the same and instructs them to 


Al-Munafiqun f 

spend in His path by saying: O you who have faith in Allah, and who act on what He has ordained for you, do not let your 
wealth nor your children distract you from the prayer or any of the other obligations of Islam. Those whose wealth and 
children distract them from the prayer and the other obligations that Allah has imposed on them, they are the true losers 
who will lose themselves and their families on the day of judgment. 

{j>S) Spend from the wealth that Allah has provided to you before death comes to one of you and he says to his Lord: Lord, 
if only You would reprieve me for a short while, I would give charity from my wealth in Allah’s path and I would be one 
of Allah’s righteous servants whose actions are righteous. 

@ Allah(may He be glorified), will never reprieve a soul when its time comes and its life has ended. Allah is aware of 
what you do. Nothing of that is hidden from Him and He will recompense you for the same, if good then with good, and 
if evil then with bad. 

Beneficial Points: 

1. Turning away from advice and being arrogant are attributes of the hypocrites. 

2. Honour is for Allah, His messenger and the believers and humiliation is for their enemies. 

3. The danger of wealth and children is they preoccupy one from Allah’s remembrance. 

4. The obligation of rushing to do good deeds before death. 




nmr 




Part 28 
























| Oil | 


001 




The Loss (Surah Al-Taghabun) 

® Themes of the Surah: 

This Surah is invitation to the Faith and obedience 
(to Allah) and the teaching of good morals. 

^Explanation: 

All created things in the heavens and all created 
things on earth declare Allah’s transcendence and 
purity from every attribute of deficiency that is not 
appropriate for Him. Sovereignty belongs to Him 
alone and there is no sovereign besides Him. Good 
praise is due to Him alone. He has power over all 
things. Nothing is outside His ability. 

(Sjj) He is the One Who created you, O people. Some 
of you reject Him, and their destination is the Fire, 
and some of you have faith in Him, and their desti¬ 
nation is Paradise. Allah sees what you do. None of 
your actions are hidden from Him and He will give 
you the recompense for them. 

(Jfjj) He created the heavens and He created the 
earth with truth. He did not create them in vain. He 
formed you, O people - and made your forms beau¬ 
tiful as a favour and bounty from Him. If he wished, 

He could have made them ugly. To Him alone is the 
return on the Day of Judgement and He will give 
you the recompense of your actions, if good then 
with good, and if evil then with bad. 

@ He knows whatever is in the heavens and He 
knows whatever is on earth. He knows the actions 
that you conceal and those that you reveal. Allah is 
the Knower of the good or bad that the hearts con¬ 
tain. Nothing of that is hidden from Him. 

(Sj} Has the news of the nations who denied before 
you not reached you, O idolaters - such as the people of Noah, the Ad, the Thamud and others. They tasted the punishment 
of the disbelief they had perpetrated in the world, and in the afterlife they will receive a painful punishment. Indeed, that 
has come to you. So take a lesson from their eventual outcome and repent to Allah before that which befell them befalls 
you. 

@ That punishment which came on them, only came on them on account of the fact that their messengers used to bring 
clear evidence and glaring proof from Allah, but they said in denial of the fact that messengers could be from the human 
race: ‘Are human beings going to guide us to the truth?! ’ So they disbelieved and turned away from having faith in them. 
But they did not harm Allah at all. Allah is in no need of their faith and obedience, because their obedience does not 
increase him in anything. Allah is Self-Sufficient and in no need of His servants. He is praiseworthy in His statements 
and actions. 

@ Those who disbelieved in Allah claimed that Allah will not bring them back to life after their death. Say, O Messenger, 
to these people who deny resurrection: Indeed, by my Lord, you will be resurrected on the day of judgment. Then you 
will be told about what you used to do in the world. Resurrection is easy for Allah, for He had created you the first time. 
Thus, He is able to bring you back to life after your death for the reckoning and recompense. 

So have faith, O people, in Allah and have faith in His Messenger. Have faith in the Qur’an which I revealed to My 
messenger. Allah is aware of what you do. None of your actions are hidden from Him and He will give you the recom¬ 
pense for them, (jj} Remember, O Messenger, the day when Allah will gather you on the Day of Judgement to give you 
the recompense for your actions. That is the day when the loss of the disbelievers will become clear, as the believers will 
inherit the homes of the people of the Fire in Paradise, and the people of the Fire will inherit the homes of the people 
of Paradise in the Fire. Those who have faith in Allah and do righteous deeds, Allah will remit their sins from them and 
enter them into gardens, under the palaces and trees of which rivers flow, to live in them forever and never to come out, 
the bliss of which will not end. That which they attained is the great success, which no other success can come close to. 

Beneficial Points: 

1. The division of people into the wretched and the fortunate. 

2. Faith and good deeds are means to attaining success in the world and the afterlife. 


cytj ^ 2 ^ i 

\'Xj\ 


Al-Taghabun 


556 





















> 

o 

o 






jgya. 






i> 


<0 Those who disbelieved in Allah and reject My 
verses, which I revealed to My messenger, they are 
the people of the Fire who will remain there forev¬ 
er. What an evil destination is theirs! 

(0 No one is afflicted with any difficulty in him¬ 
self, his wealth or his children except by Allah’s 
decree and decision. Those who have faith in Allah 
and in His decree and decision, Allah guides their 
hearts to submit to his Command and to be pleased 
with His decree. Allah knows everything, nothing 
is hidden from Him. 

<0 Follow Allah and follow the Messenger. If you 
turn away from what the Messenger brought to you, 
then the sin of such turning away is to your detri¬ 
ment. The Messenger’s duty is only to convey what 
I have instructed him to convey, and He has con¬ 
veyed what he was instructed to convey. 

(0 Allah is the Being deserving of worship. There 
is no other being deserving of worship besides 
Him. Let the believers place their reliance in Allah 
alone in all their affairs. 

0) O you who have faith in Allah, and who act on 
what He has ordained for you, among your wives 
and your children there is an enemy of yours, be¬ 
cause they will distract you from the remembrance 
of Allah and striving in His path and they will dis¬ 
courage you. So be careful of their having an effect 
on you. If you overlook, ignore and cover up their 
mistakes, then Allah will forgive your sins and have 
mercy on you. The recompense will be of the same 
kind as the deed. 

0 Your wealth and your children are a trial and test 
for you. They may entice you to earn the unlawful 
and leave out following Allah. Allah has with Him great reward for those who give preference to following Him over 
following their children and becoming occupied with wealth. This great recompense is Paradise. 

0 So be mindful of Allah by fulfilling His instructions and avoiding His prohibitions as far as you can follow Him. Lis¬ 
ten and follow Allah and His messenger. Spend your wealth, which Allah has provided to you, in avenues of good. Those 
whom Allah has protected from the greed of their souls, they are the ones who will attain what they desire and who will 
be saved from what they fear. 

0 If you give Allah a good loan, by spending your wealth in His path. He will multiply the reward for you by making 
each good deed equal to ten of its like, up until seven hundred times or even more, and He will overlook your sins. Allah 
is Appreciative and gives huge reward for little action, and He is Forbearing and does not rush to punish. 

0 Allah (may He be glorified) knows what is in the Ghaib and He knows what is present. Nothing of that is hidden from 
Him. He is the Mighty, Whom none can overpower, the Wise in His creating, decrees and laws. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Belief in predestination is one of the pillars of faith. 

2. The task of the messengers is to convey Allah’s message. Guidance is in Allah’s hands. 

3. The need to be aware of the temptation of wealth and family. 

4. Imposition of duties are within the limits of the capacity of the one on whom they are imposed. 

5. The danger of innate greed. 

6. Reward is multiplied for those who spend in Allah’s path. 


^ ^ ^ v- ^ ^ ^ ^ Jj I 

0 ■ * 

) jL^JyLP 45i\ 
























\oj 



Ivji-'l 


-Lx) J^:(J?JJo^lj>Jji3 
4J^ a -Xl^J^J UyL^Jj^Ja J ijj| 

4j^\j 

Cx°-^ * < -^? > ~Cy^' Wy>^ 

■V«Cr5t;Jj 


The Divorce (Surah Al-Talaq) 

^ Topic of the Surah: 

Emphasis on giving importance to the issue of di¬ 
vorce and its laws, whilst also mentioning the con¬ 
sequences of Allah-consciousness and trespassing 
the limits of Allah. 

^ Explanation: 

(Jj) O Prophet! If you or any of the men from your 
nation intend to divorce your wives, then he should 
issue a divorce to her considering her waiting pe¬ 
riod. That is that the divorce should be issued in 
a period of purity between two separate menses, 
in which he has not had sexual relations with her. 

Also, keep track of the waiting period, so that you 
are able to take your wives back within it if you in¬ 
tend to do so. And be mindful of Allah by fulfilling 
His commands and refraining from the things He 
has not allowed; do not force your divorced wives 
out of the homes they live in, until their waiting 
periods finish, except if they commit an obvious 
shameful act i.e. adultery. Those are the limits of 
Allah He has set for His servants; whoever tres¬ 
passes the limits of Allah has indeed, oppressed 
himself by placing himself in a situation of doom, 
because of disobeying his Lord. O divorcee! You do 
not know, perhaps Allah may create a longing in the 
heart of the spouse, and he may take his wife back. 

Cj) So when they draw nearer to the end of their 
waiting periods, take them back if you long to do 
so, while maintaining the best of conduct, or do not 
take them back until their waiting periods finish 
and they gain control over their own affairs, after 
fulfilling for them their rights. And if you intend to either take them back or separate from them, make two honest people 
from among you witness it to dispel any dispute in future. O witnesses! Give testimony seeking the pleasure of Allah. 
These laws are mentioned to remind those that bring faith in Allah and in the Day of Judgement, because it is them who 
truly benefit from reminders and advice. And whoever is mindful of Allah by fulfilling His commands and refraining 
from the things He has not allowed, Allah will create an exit for him from every difficulty and worry. 

(Sj) And He will provide for him in ways he did not even imagine, nor had ever thought of. Whoever relies on Allah in his 
matters, He will be sufficient for him. Indeed, Allah will make His decision come to pass; nothing makes him incapable 
nor does He miss anything. He has appointed a fixed time for everything, so the severity and ease both have fixed times; 
they are never permanent on the human. 

As for those divorcees who have no hope in menstruating due to old age, if you doubt in the manner of calculating 
their waiting period, then it is three months. Likewise, the waiting period of girls who have not reached the age of puberty 
and hence do not menstruate, their waiting period will also be three months. As for pregnant women, their waiting period 
after divorce or being widowed is when they give birth. Whoever is mindful of Allah by fulfilling His commands and re¬ 
fraining from the things He has not allowed, Allah will make his affairs easy for him and make easy every difficult matter. 
Cjp) O believers! The aforementioned laws of divorce, revocation and waiting periods are the laws of Allah which He has 
revealed upon you so that you may implement them. And whoever is mindful of Allah by fulfilling his commands and 
refraining from the things He has not allowed, Allah will erase the bad deeds that he committed from his record and grant 
him a great reward in the afterlife, i.e. Paradise and everlasting blessings. 

4*} Beneficial Points: 

1. Address to the Prophet (peace be upon him) is an address to his nation also, as long as there is no exclusivity estab¬ 
lished. 2. It is obligatory to provide shelter and expenses to wife one have issued a revocable divorce to. 3. It is only 
possible to revoke a revocable divorce before the waiting period finishes. 4. It is advisable to appoint witnesses to prevent 
disputes. 5. The waiting period of a divorced woman with whom marriage has been consummated is three months is she 
does not menstruate due to old or young age. 6. The waiting period of a pregnant woman who has either been divorced 
or widowed, is until she gives birth. 7. There are numerous benefits of Allah-consciousness, and it is a great quality. 






























j> * > 

'4e)t 


0^9 1 0 Qjr^ 

c^p ajJJs ,'jp (y^ 4js \ [ \^z^j Laic \ cLa 

L^AC-L^J *AC^5 L^ 

-* *’"* 9 "’’ . i=2. 

S’ ^ y* Q *+* *0 ^“c. ^ ■'£. ^ /&0 $ ^f^S S* S'* s' S* 

£>\z\p\*ifj\\^ \ Jjts;&\ 1^ joj^U j^4) 



CS^C&Jjr> ^ (Ji CrioUaS \ 3^ 0^ \ 

c^*-^ (3^c£^ 4j^\(^}\|j_j 4ii\ ( j-^ = ^\ j30o\ 

^3 6 4&£jS$ \ Si? 

J^==u J^\^ jS 4&\ sJL>V$ J^-^>(^lK 


After Allah mentioned the laws of divorce and rev¬ 
ocation, He then mentions the laws of providing 
expenses and shelter, saying: 

Cjj After Allah mentioned the laws of divorce and 
revocation, He then mentions the laws of providing 
expenses and shelter, saying: O husbands! House 
them wherever you yourselves live, according to 
your means; Allah does not burden you with any¬ 
thing other than that. Do not put any restriction in 
expenses and shelter upon them, hoping to place 
them in difficulty. If the divorcee is pregnant, spend 
on her until she gives birth, and if she breastfeeds 
your child for you then give her the wage of her 
breastfeeding. Come to a mutual agreement over 
the matter of the wage with appropriate courtesy; if 
the husband shows miserliness in the wage the wife 
wants, or if she shows greed and is not content with 
anything except her demands, then the father of the 
child should hire a foster mother who breastfeeds 
his child for him. 

@ Whoever has abundance in wealth should spend 
well on the wife he has divorced and upon his child; 
and whoever is financially restricted should spend 
according to what Allah has given him. Allah does 
not burden any soul except with what He has pro¬ 
vided it with, never does He burden them with more 
than that or more than the strength it holds. Allah 
will soon create abundance and independence after 
his difficult state. 

@ After Allah mentioned a set of commands, He 
then warns against turning away from them and 
mentions the evil outcome of doing so. He says: 
Al-Talaq _ 559 _ Part 28 _ There are many communities whom I took to ac¬ 

count severely for their evil deeds, after they had disobeyed the commands of their Lord may He be glorified and His 
Messengers (peace be upon them). I also punished them with a horrible punishment in the world and the afterlife. 
@) So they tasted the outcome of their evil deeds, and their finale was losing out in the world and losing out in the after¬ 
life. 

@ Allah has prepared for them a strong punishment, so be mindful of Allah, O people of intelligence, who have faith 
in Allah and His Messenger - by fulfilling His commands and refraining from the things He has not allowed, so that the 
same punishment that afflicted them does not afflict you as well. Verily Allah has revealed a reminder that reminds you 
of the evil outcome of disobeying Him, and the good outcome of obeying him. 

@ This reminder is a Messenger of His who recites His clear verses to you, wherein there is no ambiguity, in the hope 
that he removes those who have faith in Allah and believe in His Messenger and do good deeds, from the darkness of de¬ 
viance into the light of guidance. And whoever has faith in Allah and does good deeds, Allah will enter them into gardens 
under the palaces and trees of which rivers flow, and wherein they will reside forever. Verily Allah will sustain them well 
by entering them into a Paradise, the bounties of which shall never finish. 

@ Allah is the one who created the seven heavens. He also created seven earths just like He created seven heavens. His 
instructions related to matters of the universe and religion descend through the heavens. Perhaps this will make you real¬ 
ise that Allah is capable of everything, and that He be glorified has encompassed everything with His knowledge; nothing 
is hidden from Him in the heavens or the earth. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. It is obligatory to provide shelter and expenses for a woman issued a revocable divorce, as long as she remains in her 
waiting period. It is also obligatory for a pregnant divorcee. 

2. There is no obligation upon a divorced woman who has given birth to breastfeed the child. 

3. The burden of obligation is only issued according to one’s capability. 

4. It is established that there are seven earths. 























Lc j A>z2a> <Jf^> 

^ i=e. ^ ^ "" ^ 

oi® jt# \j& M a 2 c& ^ISt? 

y^>_ 

L)t$ cu*^? JuiS 

0^L Jc^) ^SC^»lL^^ CJ$r?^3^ ^ ^k/^zJ A2-^^& 


The Prohibition (Surah Al-Tahrim) 

® Topic of the Surah: 

Emphasis on spiritually developing the Prophetic 
household, so that it becomes exemplary for a fam¬ 
ily and community. 

^Explanation: 

@ O Messenger! Why do you make impermissible 
that which Allah has made permissible for you, i.e. 
making use of your servant girl Mariah, wanting to 
please your wives in doing so after they expressed 
protective jealousy over her? Allah is Forgiving to¬ 
wards you and is Merciful to you. 

{$} Verily, Allah has legislated for you to break your 
oaths by giving expiation if you find something bet¬ 
ter than the oaths your took or if you go against 
them. Allah is your helper and He is The Knower of 
your circumstances and what is best for you; He is 
The Wise in His legislation and decree. 

(jj And remember when the Prophet (peace be 
upon him) mentioned something only to Hafsah, 
and that was that he will never again go close to his 
wife Mariah. So after Hafsah informed ‘A’ishah of 
the information, and Allah informed His Messenger 
of his secret having been spread, he reprimanded 
Hafsah and told her part of what she had said, not 
mentioning another. So she asked him, “Who in¬ 
formed you of this?” He replied, “The Knower of 
everything and The Aware of every hidden thing 
informed me of it.” 

((J) It is your duty that you both repent, because 
your hearts have inclined towards liking something 
the Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him) dis¬ 
liked, i.e. staying away from his servant girl and forbidding her upon himself. And if you insist upon joining forces 
against him, then know that Allah is his guardian and helper, and so is Gabriel and the best of believers. The angels are 
also his helpers and supporters after Allah against those who cause inconvenience to him. 

@ It is very likely that if His Messenger was to divorce both of you, Allah may He be glorified will give him wives better 
than you, who are submissive to his instructions, believing in Allah and His Messenger, obedient to Allah, repenting of 
their sins, devoted to their Lord, fasting; previously married and virgins whom no one except the Messenger has touched. 
However, he did not divorce them. 

{J} O those who have faith in Allah and act according to what He has legislated for them! Put up a barrier for yourselves 
and your families against a huge fire which is stoked with people and stones. Appointed over this fire are tough angels 
who are harsh to whoever enters it. They do not disobey the command of Allah when He commands them, and they do 
whatever He commands them to do without hesitation or showing weakness. 

The disbelievers will be told on the day of resurrection: O you who have disbelieved in Allah! Do not make excuses 
today for the disbelief and sins you used to commit, because your excuses will not be accepted. Today, you will be requit¬ 
ed only for the disbelief in Allah and rejection of His Messengers you used to perpetrate in the world. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Expiation for oaths has been legislated. 

2. Allah mentions the status of the Prophet (peace be upon him) according to his Lord, and His defending him. 

3. A believer is responsible for himself and his family. 


j jLil JsSLt; '^===C^A 































(jjD O those who have faith in Allah and act accord¬ 
ing to what He has legislated for them! Repent to 
Allah sincerely for your sins; Allah will erase your 
sins from your records and enter you into gardens 
on the, under the palaces and trees of which rivers 
flow, on the Day of Judgement: a day on which Al¬ 
lah will not humiliate the Prophet nor those who 
had faith with him, by entering them into the hell- 
fire. Rather, their light will shine in front of them 
and their right sides on the Bridge, and they will be 
saying: “O our Lord! Perfect for us our light so that 
we can enter Paradise and not be like the hypocrites 
whose light dies out at the Bridge; and forgive our 
sins for us, because You are indeed, capable of 
everything. You are not incapable of perfecting our 
light and forgiving our sins.” 

@ O Messenger! Strive against the disbelievers 
with the sword, and against the hypocrites with 
your tongue and upholding the punishments. And 
be harsh against them so that they fear you. The 
abode they will end up in on the Day of Judgement 
is hell, and that abode is a very evil abode indeed. 
@ Allah gives an example of those who disbelieve 
in Allah and His Messenger that their relationship 
with the believers will not benefit them in any con¬ 
dition: the example of the two wives of two of the 
prophets of Allah: the wives of Noah and Lot. For 
verily they were wives to two pious servants, but 
they deceived their husbands by preventing from 
the path of Allah and helping the people of disbelief 
from their nations. Their being wives of these two 
pious servants did not help them, and it will be said 
to them: “Enter into the hellfire amongst the disbe¬ 


lievers and transgressors entering it.” 

@ And Allah also mentions an example to those who have faith in Him and His Messengers, that their connections with 
the disbelievers will not harm them or affect them as long as they remain steadfast upon the truth: the example of the 
wife of Pharaoh when she said: “O my Lord! Build a house for me near You in Paradise, and save me from the tyranny 
of Pharaoh, his might and his evil deeds; and save me also from the people who wrong themselves by following him in 
his transgression and oppression.” 

@ And Allah also mentions an example for those who have faith in Him and His Messengers, in the condition of Mary 
the daughter of ‘Imran who safeguarded her private parts from fornication, so Allah commanded Gabriel to blow into her 
due to which she fell pregnant through the power of Allah with Jesus the son of Mary, without a father. She also believed 
in the religions of Allah and the books revealed to His Messengers, and she was obedient to Allah by fulfilling His com¬ 
mands and refraining from the things He did not allow. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Sincere repentance is a means of every goodness. 

2. Relationships through allegiance or blood will not benefit on the Day of Judgement if there is a difference in religion. 

3. Chastity and keeping far away from suspicion are among the qualities of pious believing women. 

















The Dominion (Surah Al-Mulk) 








^ *=&, 

(3^(3 £-^l3^lSA1^(£) 



® Topic of the Surah: 

Emphasis on making clear the perfection of the 
kingdom of Allah and His power, whilst encour¬ 
aging fearing Him and warning against his punish¬ 
ment. 

® Explanation: 

{J} The goodness of Allah who solely possesses the 
kingdom is great and abundant. He is capable of 
everything, Nothing is outside His ability. 

Cf$) The one who created death and life to test you, 

O people, which one of you is better in terms of 
actions. He is the Almighty who no one can over¬ 
power; the Forgiving of the sins of whichever of 
His servants repents to him. 

@ The one who created the seven heavens, each 
one layered above the one before it without touch¬ 
ing it. O observer! You will not witness any dis¬ 
crepancy or misappropriation in the creation of Al¬ 
lah. So look again, do you see cracks or splits? You 
will never see them; you will only see a perfect, 
masterful creation. 

{J} Then, look again time after time; your eyesight 
will return humiliated without having found any 
defect or fault in the creation of the heaven; ex¬ 
hausted without being able to see. 

CjJ And verily I adorned the nearest sky to the earth 
with shining stars, making them shoot and repelling 
with them the satans with them who try to eaves¬ 
drop. I have also prepared for them a blazing fire 
in the afterlife. 

And for those who disbelieve in their Lord, on 
the Day of Judgement there is the punishment of a raging fire. Very evil is place they will return to. 

@ When they will be thrown into the hellfire, they will hear an extremely evil sound: it will be bubbling like a boiling 
pot. 

@ It almost bursts within itself and comes apart due to its extreme rage over those that are thrown into it. Each time a 
group is thrown into it from the disbelievers, the angels appointed over it will ask them scoldingly: “Did a Messenger not 
come to you in the world, warning you of the punishment of Allah?” 

{J} The disbelievers will say, “Indeed! A Messenger did come to us warning us of the punishment of Allah but we rejected 
him, and we said to him, “Allah did not reveal any revelation. O Messengers! You are in nothing but clear deviance from 
the truth.”” 

@ The disbelievers will say, “If we had listened attentively, or had thought clearly like the one who can differentiate the 
truth from falsehood, we would not have been amongst the people of the hellfire. Rather, we would have had faith in the 
Messengers and believed in whatever they brought, being from the people of Paradise.” 

@ So they will confess against themselves to having disbelieved and rejected, thereby being worthy of the hellfire. So 
away with the people of the hellfire! 

@ After Allah mentions the traits of the disbelievers and their requital, he follows it up with mentioning the qualities of 
the people of faith and their requital, saying: “Indeed, those who fear Allah in privacy, they will be forgiven for their sins 
and will get a great reward, i.e. Paradise.” 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Allah created death and life to test the actions of His servants. 

2. Allah’s creation is free of any faults; it is perfect. 

3. Hell will be furious with the disbelievers and angry, in protective jealousy for Allah may He be glorified. 

4. Confession is a clear evidence against the confessor. 
































|oe> 

(^) \ ^5 ^3 ^^!>3 o^-l^S W^- 0 i 

0^2^ <i A^Ji 

i^O^oiS'S^_^Cs o£Oi^ o^J^{^^k<j2T 
A^-ys l 5^\ \X& 

A \0jybyfs-^\fr^ <Jj ^jj SJlS\ c>\j£k!)jnsS^ 

') T 1 1 


1 0 \J&1 

% 

£ 


@ O people! Speak secretively or openly; Allah 
hears it anyway. Indeed, He may He be glorified is 
aware of whatever is in the hearts of His servants; 
nothing is hidden from Him in that regard. 

@ Does the one who created all creation not know 
of the secret, and that which is more inconspicuous 
than the secret? He is The Kind to His servants; The 
Aware of their affairs. Nothing is hidden from Him 
in that regard. 

@ He is the one who made the earth soft and easy 
for you to live on, so travel around to its edges and 
eat from the provision He has prepared for you 
within it. To Him alone you will be resurrected for 
accountability and requital. 

@ Do you feel safe from the being in the heavens 
that He may cause the earth to split beneath you, 
just as He caused it to split beneath Korah, despite 
it having been soft and easy to live on? It could 
suddenly shake with you on it, after being firm and 
solid. 

@ Or do you feel safe from the being in the heav¬ 
ens that He could rain down stones upon you just 
like He did upon the people of Lot? Then you will 
realise, when you see My punishment for your¬ 
selves, My warnings to you. But you will never be 
able to benefit from them after having witnessed 
the punishment. 

@ Verily, the nations that came before these idol¬ 
aters rejected, and so the punishment of Allah de¬ 
scended upon them after they insisted in their dis¬ 
belief and rejection, so how was My disavowal of 
them? Verily, it was a severe disavowal. 

@ Do these rejectors not see the birds above them 
flying in rows, side by side with one another? What stops them from falling to the ground, except Allah? Indeed, He is 
The Seeing of everything, nothing is hidden from Him. 

{j|) O disbelievers! There is no army that can save you from the punishment of Allah if He decides to punish you. The 
disbelievers are in nothing but deception; Satan has deceived them and they have fallen into his deception, 
ijj) And there is no one that can sustain you if Allah stops His provisions from reaching you. Rather, the crux is that the 
disbelievers have prolonged in transgression, arrogance and refusal of the truth. 

djj) So is the one who walks while falling on his face i.e. the idolater more guided, or the believer who walks upright on 
the straight path? 

@ O Messenger! Say to these idolaters who reject: “Allah is the one who created you and made for you ears through 
which you hear, eyes with which you see, and hearts through which you think. Little do you show gratitude to Him for 
the blessings He has conferred upon you. 

@ O Messenger! Say to these idolaters who reject: “Allah is the one who dispersed you on earth and made you spread 
upon it, not your idols which cannot create anything. To Him alone you will be gathered on the Day of Judgement for 
accountability and requital, not your idols. So fear Him and worship Him alone. 

@ And the rejectors of the resurrection, thinking it to be far-fetched, say, “O Muhammad! When will this promise that 
you and your companions promise us with, happen, if you are truthful in your claim that it will occur?” 

(j§) Say, O Messenger: “The knowledge of the Hour is with Allah; only He knows when it will occur. I am only a clear 
warner in my warning to you.” 

Beneficial Points: 

1. Allah is aware of what the hearts of His servants conceal. 

2. Disbelief and sins are causes of the punishment of Allah in the world and the afterlife. 

3. Disbelief in Allah is darkness and confusion, while faith in Him is light and guidance. 

4. The knowledge of the hour is only with Allah alone. 






Al-Mulk 


563 


Part 29 


















oM 




js 05^55^ 

l^c*^ c3^ rJ? ^4S , ‘^ O^ ^AjVxal £• 

«|jjl (^) | 




3 


0^5 $) ^o^icJ^ li Cj)) oj 


kyj 


@ So when the promise will come upon them and 
they will see the punishment close to them on the 
Day of Judgement, the faces of those who disbe¬ 
lieved in Allah will change and become dark. And 
it will be said to them, “This is what you used to ask 
for and want hastily!” 

jjp) O Messenger! Say to these rejecting idolaters, 
reprimanding them: “Tell me, if Allah was to case 
death to me and to those with me i.e. the believers, 
who will save the disbelievers from a painful pun¬ 
ishment?” No one will ever save them from it. 

@ O Messenger! Say to these idolaters: “He is 
The Merciful who invites you to worshipping Him 
alone. We have brought faith in Him, and upon Him 
alone we rely for our affairs. You will soon know, 
inevitably, who was in clear deviance and who was 
on the straight path.” 

@ O Messenger! Say to these idolaters: “Tell me, if 
the water you drink from was to seep away into the 
earth and you could not get to it, who then would 
bring you abundant, flowing water?” No one other 
than Allah could. 

The Pen (Surah Al-Qalam) 

® Topic of the Surah: 

Emphasis on making the knowledge of the Prophet 
(peace be upon him) and his creation clear, while 
supporting him after the idolaters attacking him. 

{•} Explanation: 

Cp The discussion on similar letters has already 
passed in Surah Al-Baqarah. Allah takes an oath on 
the Pen and whatever the people write with their 
pens. 

O Messenger! You are not a madman, due to the messengership Allah has blessed you with. Rather, you are free of 
the insanity the idolaters accuse you with. 

(Jl Indeed, there is definitely a great, everlasting reward for you for your conveying the message to the people, without 
there being a favour outstanding upon you for anyone. 

(J|J) And indeed, you are definitely on the greatest of character that the Qur’an has brought; you are embodied with it to 
the most perfect degree. 

(fj) So you will soon see, and these rejectors will also see. 

(p When the truth is revealed, who from amongst you was actually a madman. 

(jj O Messenger! Indeed, your Lord knows of whoever deviates from His path, and He is best aware of those who are 
guided to it. Therefore, He knows that they are the ones who have deviated from it, and that you have been guided to it. 
Cp So, O Messenger, do not follow the rejectors in what you have brought. 

(Sjj) They wish that you were soft and compromising towards them in matters of religion, so they can be soft and kind to 
you in return. 

@ And do not follow anyone who frequently takes false oaths, and is vulgar. 

@ Who frequently backbites the people, and bears tales between them to cause division between them. 

(SjD Who often prevents goodness and oppresses the people in their wealth, their dignity and their lives; who is a habitual 
sinner and disobeyer. @ Who is stubborn and rude, one residing among his people without being related to them. @ Just 
because he is a person of wealth and many sons, he is too arrogant to have faith in Allah and in His Messenger. @ When 
My verses are read to him, he says, “This are the tales written of the people of the past.” @ I will place a mark on his 
nose which will stick with him and disfigure him. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The Messenger (peace be upon him) is an embodiment of the character of the Qur’an. 

2. The traits of the disbelievers are blameworthy traits. It is obligatory upon a believer to distance himself from them, and 
from following anyone with them. 



























($) 0^^ij5^t3 $) J^jy^ ^ 

^ 'Z 0 9 s' 'fr ^ o'* o > 

Ly^ \ ji^3y \s \jbj\j \ ja\s Qt) y^-^° 

(3^ ^3 (J^-3^ ($ 

cL-Lu^jo iVo^ig'^tj^C j )^vs^Ldijjlst^) 

£06 

;^4a\^S^^jT05 P6& 

^ 0) OySS^- 1^(0 o\^>iil i t_y*^p® i 

6106A; ^^siC^C 
oljuQ^, ^J}>\^f. 
1^/^>41^ 0Jiy5: 


*<6 


Al-Qalam 


565 


Part 29 


@ Indeed, I have tested these idolaters with 
drought and hunger, just as I tested the people of 
the garden when they swore that they will quickly 
harvest its fruits in the morning, so that the poor 
cannot eat from them. 

@ They did not attribute the matter to Allah among 
themselves, by saying: “If Allah wills”. 

@ So I sent a fire to the garden which consumed it 
while its owners were asleep, unable to defend it. 
@> It became black, like a dark night. 

(SjS> In the morning, its owners called on each other. 
@ Saying, “Leave early towards your crop before 
the poor people arrive, if indeed, you wish to har¬ 
vest your crops.” 

@> So they made their way towards their crop 
quickly, talking among themselves in hushed tones. 
@ They were saying to one another: “No poor per¬ 
son should come to you at the garden today.” 

@ They left in the early morning, determined not 
to let anyone get to their crops. 

@> Then, when they saw their crops having been 
burnt, they said to each other, “Surely, we have lost 
our way?!” 

(jp “Nay! We have been deprived of harvesting our 
crops because of us having been determined to pre¬ 
vent the poor from eating them.” 

@ The most virtuous among them said, “Did I not 
tell you when you made up your mind to prevent 
the poor from your crops: “Why do you not glorify 
Allah and repent to Him?”” 

@ They said, “Glory be to our Lord; indeed, we 
wronged ourselves when we decided to prevent the 
poor from the crops of our garden.” 


@ So they began to go back on their words out of regret. 

@ They said, regretfully, “How much we have lost! Indeed, we transgressed the limits by depriving the poor of their 
rights.” 

@ “It is hoped from our Lord that He gives us better than our garden in return. Indeed, we are desirous towards Him; we 
hope for forgiveness from Him and seek goodness from Him.” 

@ I punish those who disobey Me just like I punished these people with the punishment of depravation. And indeed, the 
punishment of the afterlife is greater, if only they were to know its severity and permanence. 

@ Indeed, those who are mindful of Allah by fulfilling His commands and refraining from the things He has not allowed, 
will have gardens of pleasure by their Lord, wherein they will live in permanent luxury. 

Cj) Should I make the Muslims the same as the disbelievers in terms of requital, as the idolaters of Makkah claim? 

{j} O idolaters! What is wrong with you; how can you come to this oppressive, warped conclusion? 

@ Do you have a book in which you read that there should be equality between the obedient and disobedient? 
if) Indeed, in that book you would then have whatever you choose in the afterlife. 

@> Or, do you have covenants with Me weighted with oaths, that you will get whatever you decide for yourselves? 

C§| O Messenger! Ask those making these statement: “Who is their guarantor for this?” 

@ Or do they have associates other than Allah who make them equal in requital with the believers? If so, they should 
bring forth these associates of theirs if they are true in their claim that they have made them equal in requital with the 
believers. 

@ On the Day of Judgement, the horror will become clear and our Lord will expose a part of His Shin. The people will 
be invited to prostrate, so the believers will prostrate, but the disbelievers and hypocrites will remain standing, unable to 
prostrate. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Preventing the right of the poor is the cause of wealth being destroyed. 2. A believer and disbeliever are not equal in 
requital, just as they are not equal in their qualities. 


















j 


o-n 





A^ul^>~ I 



lSaL> i^Oj5-d\ (^rL^S^S^j {£) 

^si\j J^L^Jj flj\o>3^A_ei 

jC*y*j 

0oUO^^^J0o>/^/441444 


(Sjj> Their eyesight will be humiliated; humiliation 
and regret will overcome them. Yet in the world, 
they were asked to prostrate to Allah while they 
were in safety from what they will be facing on that 
day. 

(jjj) O Messenger! Leave me to deal with whoever 
denies this Qur’an that has been revealed to you. I 
will drive them to the punishment gradually, in a 
way they do not realise that it is a method of leading 
them gradually into destruction. 

(Sjj) And I give them respite for a short while so that 
they go to extremes in their sin. Indeed, My plan 
regarding the people of disbelief and rejection is 
firm; they will not escape Me nor be safe from My 
punishment. 

@ O Messenger! Do you seek a reward from them 
for what you invite them towards, due to which 
they are greatly burdened, being the cause of their 
turning away from you? The reality is the opposite: 
you do not seek any reward from them; so what 
stops them from following you? 

{jp Or do they have knowledge of the Ghaib from 
which they write whatever proof appeal to them, 
that they then use to argue against you? 

^ O Messenger! So wait for the decision of your 
Lord to give them respite and gradually lead them 
into destruction. And do not be like the companion 
of the whale i.e. Jonah (peace be upon him) who be¬ 
came annoyed with his people, and then called out 
to his Lord while distressed in the darkness of the 
sea and the darkness of the stomach of the whale. 

@ Had it not been for the mercy of Allah reaching 
him, the whale would have thrown him on a barren 
land, rebuked. 

C§p But his Lord chose him and made him one of His pious servants. 

(JS) And indeed, those who disbelieve in Allah and reject his Messengers could almost bring you to the ground with their 
eyes due to their extremely sharp glances towards you when they hear this Qur’an that was revealed to you. While fol¬ 
lowing their desires and turning away from the truth, they say, “Indeed, the Messenger who has brought it is a madman.” 
@ Yet the Qur’an that has been revealed to you is only a reminder and admonition for the humans and the Jinn. 






Al-Qalam 


566 




The Inevitable (Surah Al-Haq-qah) 


® Themes of the Surah: 

Emphasis on the definitive nature of the occurrence of the Day of Judgement; on the truth of the Qur’an; on promising 
the believers of ease and on warning the rejectors of ultimate distress. 

Explanation: 

CjJ) Allah mentions the hour or resurrection that will occur on everyone. 

Cp Then He enhances its importance by asking this question: ‘What is al-Haq-qah?’ 

jjS) Has anyone taught you about this al-Haq-qah? @ The Thamud, the people of Saleh, and the ‘Ad, the people of Hud 
all denied the Day of Judgement that will strike the people with its severe horrors. @ As for the Thamud, Allah destroyed 
them with a scream that reached the height of severity and horror. (Sj) As for the ‘Ad, Allah destroyed them with a severely 
cold, relentless wind that reached the height of harshness upon them, (jj) Allah released it upon them for seven nights and 
eight days, destroying them all. You would have seen the people destroyed in their homes, thrown onto the ground by the 
wind; as if they were the decomposed trunks of date palms fallen to the ground. (Sj) Do you see anyone of them remaining, 
after the punishment that afflicted them? 

Beneficial Points: 

1. Patience is a praiseworthy quality, necessary for the callers towards Allah and others. 2. Allah sends different punish¬ 
ments upon the deserving disbelievers and sinners, showing His perfect justice and complete omnipotence. 





























«£UsJ 


onv 




(0) Pharaoh and the nations before him, and the 
communities that were punished by being turned 
upside down i.e. the people of Lot, all committed 
wrong acts in ascribing partners with Allah and 
sins. 

@ Each of them disobeyed their Messengers who 
were sent to them and rejected them, so Allah 
seized them with a seizing that exceeded the force 
required to destroy them. 

@ Indeed, when the water exceeded its limit in ris¬ 
ing, I carried those of you who were in their backs 
on the ark that floated and which Noah (peace be 
upon him) built upon My command. So in effect, 
I carried you. 

@ So that I could let the ark and its tale become a 
lesson through which proof of the destruction of the 
people of disbelief could be taken, together with the 
saving of the people of faith, and so attentive ears 
could take heed. 

@ So when the appointed angel will blow into the 
trumpet once, being the second blowing. 

@ And the earth and mountains are raised, then 
crushed with one severe blow, the earth and its 
mountains will turn to pieces. 

|§§) On the day when all that happens, the Day of 
Judgement will occur. 

@ And the sky will crack open on that day because 
of the angels descending from it. So on that day it 
will be weak, whereas it was once solid and un¬ 
yielding. 

@ The angels will be on its edges and comers. 
Eight elite angels will carry the throne of your Lord 
on that great day. 

(@) O people! On that Day, you will be exhibited for judgemen]; not hidden among you is anything concealed, rather Allah 
will be fully aware and watchful of it. 

@ As for the one who is given his book of deeds in his right hand, he will say out of happiness and delight, “Take and 
read my book of deeds!” 

@ “Indeed, I did good deeds in the world and was convinced of being resurrected and having to meet my reward.” 

@ So he will be living in a contented manner because of seeing the everlasting favours. 

In a Paradise elevated in position and rank. 

C§P The fruits of which will be near to those intending to consume them. 

{§p It will be said to them in hospitality, “Eat and drink carefree of any ill repercussions due to the good deeds you sent 
forth in the days passed in the world.” 

{§| As for the one who will be given his book of deeds in his left hand, he will say out of extreme regret, “If only I had 
not been given my book of deeds, because of the evil deeds deserving punishment within it.” 

And if only I did not know what the result of my giving account was.” 

If only the death I died, was the final one after which I was never resurrected.” 

My wealth did not protect me at all from the punishment of Allah.” 

My evidence has deserted me, as well as all the strength and dignity.” 
jp And it will be said, “O angels! Grab him and gather his hands at his neck.” 

.“Then enter him into the hellfire so that he sees its heat.” 

“Then chain him up with a chain measuring seventy cubits in length.” 

“Indeed, he would not believe in Allah the Great.” (jp “Neither would he encourage others to feed the poor.” 

So on the Day of Judgement, he will have no relative to save him from the punishment. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Taking the book of deeds in one’s right hand on the Day of Judgement is a sign of good fortune, while taking it in one’s 
left is a sign of misfortune. 2. It is important in Islam to feed the poor and encourage people to do so. 


/x0y&J\ 

j 


















| ojj£* 


O 

> 



J>^ Lo^ 

^^jat^CZ^C' (J_y^_^j J$) Og^^ ^ C- 

b^ (^) gpaPAJ_. P>-%^a3 jAjL? ($) L^rt^*” AUP -A^ C^ 
Or^A^J \ Jp "ojZS^ jAj^}\ ^ OjT-g^==^^$C^O^J»^ 
(^) j i^-XjL 





@ Neither will he have any food to eat except the 
fluid flowing from the bodies of the people of the 
hellfire. 

@ Only the sinners will eat from that food. 

@ Allah takes an oath on whatever you see. 

@ And He also takes an oath on whatever you can¬ 
not see. 

jjj) That indeed, the Qur’an is the speech of Allah, 
which His noble Messenger recites to the people. 

© It is not the speech of a poet because it is not on 
the pattern of a poem; little do you believe! 

© Neither is it the speech of a fortune teller be¬ 
cause the speech of fortune tellers is different to 
that of this Qur’an; little do you take heed! 

© Rather, it is a revelation from the Lord of all 
creation. 

© And if Muhammad was to fabricate lies and at¬ 
tribute them to Me, which I had not said. 

© I would definitely take forceful and due retri¬ 
bution from him. 

© Then I would cut the vein connected to his heart. 
© But none of you can protect him from Me, so it 
is far-fetched that he fabricates lies because of you. 
© And indeed, the Qur’an is an admonition for 
those who are mindful of their Lord by fulfilling 
His commands and refraining from the things He 
has not allowed. 

© And I know that there are definitely people 
among you who reject this Qur’an. 

© Indeed, rejection of this Qur’an will be a means 
of great regret on the Day of Judgement. 

© Indeed, the Qur’an is the certain truth: there is 
no doubt and dispute that it is from Allah. 

© O Messenger! So proclaim the purity of you Lord 


of whatever is not befitting of Him, and remember His great name. 

The Ways of Ascent (Surah Al-Ma‘arij) 

^ Themes of the Surah: 

Emphasis is placed on the punishment that will descend upon the disbelievers and the favours and bouties extended to 
those that believe in the day of recompense. 

Explanation: 

© A caller from the idolaters called for the punishment upon himself and his people if this punishment was to actually 
come. It was a mockery on his part, but it will happen on the Day of Judgement. 

Cj) It will fall upon the disbelievers in Allah. There will be no one to avert this punishment. 

© From Allah the possessor of highness, ranks, virtues and favours. 

© The angels and Gabriel will ascend in them ranks on the Day of Judgement: it is a day of which the duration is fifty 
thousand years. 

© O Messenger! So be patient; a patience free of worry and complaint. 

| D Indeed, they think of this punishment to be farfetched and impossible. 

'CP But I see it as being near and inevitably occurring. 

© On the day when the sky will be like molten copper, gold and other metals. 

© And the mountains will be light, like cotton. 

© No relative will ask another regarding his state, because each person will be preoccupied with his own self. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The Qur’an is free of poetry and fortune-telling. 

2. Fabricating and attributing lies to Allah may He be glorified is dangerous. 


G --X. 




























@ Each human will see their relatives clearly, yet 
despite that no one will ask another due to the hor¬ 
ror of the scenario. The one deserving of the hellfire 
will wish to present his children to the punishment 
instead of himself. 

djp Or give his wife and brother in ransom. 

@ Or his closest relatives who would stand with 
him in the face of difficulties. 

(§S) And he will wish to give every human and Jinn 
on earth in ransom, wishing that it would save him 
from the punishment of the hellfire. 

@ It will not be as this criminal will wish for. In¬ 
deed, it is the fire of the afterlife which blazes and 
flares up. 

@ Due to its extreme heat and flares, the skin of the 
head will come clean apart. 

@ It will call out to whoever turned away from the 
truth, distanced himself from it, did not bring faith 
in it nor acted upon it. 

@ And whoever amassed wealth, withholding 
from spending it in the path of Allah. 

(ygS Indeed, man has been created extremely greedy, 
(jp When a difficulty i.e. illness or poverty befalls 
him, he shows little patience. 

@ And when something that makes him happy 
comes to him, i.e. fertility and wealth, he is very 
resistant in spending it in the path of Allah. 

@ Except for those who perform prayer; they are 
safe from these blameworthy traits. 

@ Those who are punctual with their prayers; they 
are not distracted from them and they perform them 
at their fixed times. 

Cp And those who have a set, determined amount 


of their wealth. 

f§p Which they give to whoever asks them or doesn’t, but are deprived of sustenance for whatever reason. 

fj) And those who believe in the Day of Judgement: the day Allah will requite everyone with whatever they deserve. 

@) And those who are fearful of the punishment of their Lord, despite having sent forth good deeds. 

@ Indeed, no intelligent person feels safe from the punishment of his Lord. 

{J) And those who safeguard their private parts by concealing them and keeping them away from shameful acts. 

@ Except from their wives or the servant girls they possess, because they are not blameworthy in enjoying them through 
sexual intercourse or anything less. 

@) Whoever seeks pleasure in other than whatever has been mentioned i.e. wives and servant girls, they are the ones who 
have transgressed the limits of Allah. 

@) And those who, when entrusted with wealth, secrets etc., or with agreements they enter into, they uphold them: neither 
betraying their trusts nor breaking their agreements. 

@ And those who give their testimonies in the manner sought from them, without being affected by relationships or en¬ 
mity. @ And those who are punctual in their prayers by performing them at their appropriate times, with due purity and 
composure, whilst not being distracted from them by anything. @ Those possessing the aforementioned qualities will 
be honoured in gardens, attaining everlasting favours and being able to see the blessed Face of Allah. @ O Messenger! 
What is it that has led these idolaters around you to reject you so quickly? @ Surrounding you from your right and left, 
in groups upon groups. (j§) Do each of them hope that Allah will enter them into the garden of favours, wherein they shall 
live in luxury among the everlasting bounties, while they remain on their disbelief? @ It is not as they imagine. Indeed, 
I created them from what they know: I created them from a contemptible fluid, and they are weak: they are incapable of 
bringing benefit or harm for themselves, so how could they be arrogant? @ Allah takes an oath on the Lord of the rising 
places of the sun and the moon. Indeed, Allah is the Capable. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The people of the hellfire will wish to save themselves from it using every possible method they know of from their 
worldly experiences, but there is no way it will ever happen. 



















0o^j£^,\y^iS^[¥$ ^ •££=- 


IgSJS 

fg 


t‘A£ 


j*-4si ^ o' J ^ o' L^lj^y Ul^3'\o^ 

i^^O^*^iP^5J 6 0?iSv'j£ 

. "fr ^ 'oT'^ ,*»• ^ 

oJ^J>\j 4j^ 

>3> Si ^-W' (3^=r' oiJ^J^' 2^1 

S S^ o^ o^S (jiCp 3 te 



t|5ftSLo^'V 




o' 


@ He is capable of destroying them and replacing 
them with others who obey Him; He is not incapa¬ 
ble of doing so. Nor can He be overpowered when 
He intends to destroy them and replace them. 

(SjS) O Messenger! So leave them to dive into the 
falsehood and deviance they are already in, and to 
amuse themselves in their worldly lives, until they 
encounter the Day of Judgement that they have 
been promised in the Qur’an. 

(S|P On the day when they shall leave their graves in 
a hurry, as if they are racing towards a banner. 

@ Their eyes will be humiliated, and humiliation 
will envelop them. That is the day they were prom¬ 
ised in the world, but they did not care about it. 

SOrah NOh (Noah) 

® Themes of the Surah: 

Emphasis on the importance of patience for the 
callers to Allah, and their striving in that regard 
through the story of Noah. This is to give support to 
the believers and warning to the rejectors. 

® Explanation: 

(jj) Indeed, I sent Noah to his people, inviting them 
so that he may warn them before a painful punish¬ 
ment afflicts them due to their state of ascribing 
partners to Allah. 

CjS) Noah said to his people, “O my people! Indeed, 

I am a clear wamer for you of the punishment of 
Allah that awaits you if you do not repent to Him.” 

(Sj) “And the gist of my warning to you is: “Worship 
Allah alone and do not ascribe any partners to Him; 
be mindful of Him by fulfilling His commands and 
refraining from the things He has not allowed, and obey me in whatever I instruct you to do.” 

{J} “Indeed, if you do that, Allah will forgive your sins for you in relation to other than violating the rights of the peo¬ 
ple. He will also prolong the lifespan of your nations until a time fixed according to His knowledge, wherein you shall 
populate the earth as long as you remain steadfast on it. Indeed, when death comes, it does not delay. If you truly knew, 
you would hasten to bringing faith in Allah and repenting to Him from your states of ascribing partners to Him and of 
deviance.” 

CfJ) Noah said, “O my Lord! Indeed, I called my people to Your worship and oneness, continuously, day and night.” 

C®) “But my calling them only increased them in alienation and distanced them from what I called them towards.” 

(JfJ) “And whenever I called them towards that which meant forgiveness for their sins, i.e. worshipping You alone, obedi¬ 
ence to You and Your Messenger, they blocked their ears with their fingers so that they could not hear my call. They also 
covered their faces with their clothes so that they could not see me, and they continued in their ascribing partners to you, 
showing arrogance in not accepting my call to them or submitting to it.” 

CjJ) “O my Lord! I then invited them publicly.” 

{§) “I invited them raising my voice, and I also invited them privately in a hushed tone. I used different methods of calling 
them.” 

@ Then I said to them, “O my people! Seek the forgiveness of your Lord by turning to Him. Indeed, He, may He be 
glorified, is the oft-Forgiving of the sins of whichever of His servants repents to Him.” 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Neglect of the afterlife is dangerous. 

2. Worshipping Allah and being mindful of Him is a means of sins being forgiven. 

3. It is necessary for the callers towards Allah to persist in their work, and use different methods of calling towards Him. 


>1 < >c :r Z^ 

P 0 < j \^0 

1 




Nuh 


W 570 
























0 

< 



j 0 V^J&5 dji bj>ry\ ^3 IS cJ^X^J 



0£t5 4jX? 

Lgla \^LZL3j (0Uol^li ^ ^vi l J>jc>- 4j»i\_j0\X^>-^ 

qp j\s0XXi^4-“ 
y \ij &\^$r^===c* \Jpbj 0 \$&£ )?* A £ 

i3j*u vii ijk^j\c'\^'^j\'^j bjj^j-fc^\'f- bj jSi 

<> ' * s* ' ^ ' 

jIa^ 


*0 -i 


jsj 


0^3 C 


0 >9 


4 

6\i 

X i ^ 


@ “Because if you do that, Allah will send down 
frequent rainfall for you, whenever you need it, so 
you will never face a drought.” 

@ “And He will grant you an abundance of wealth 
and offspring, make gardens grow for you from 
which you can consume fruits, and make rivers 
flow from which you can drink and irrigate your 
crops and livestock.” 

jj| “O my people! What is wrong with you that you 
do not fear the greatness of Allah, such that you dis¬ 
obey Him without any care?!” 

@ “While He created you in stages, one after the 
other: a drop of semen, then clotted blood, then a 
piece of flesh.” 

@ “Do you not see how Allah has created the seven 
heavens, one on top of the other?” 

@ “And He made the moon a light for the people 
of the earth, in the nearest of the heavens, also mak¬ 
ing the sun illuminating.” 

@ “And Allah is the one who created you from 
the earth, by creating your father Adam from soil. 
Then, you are also nourished by whatever it grows 
for you.” 

@ “Allah will then return you to it after your death, 
and then take you out of it again for the resurrec¬ 
tion.” 

@ “And Allah also spread the earth out for you, 
ready for you to live on.” 

“Perhaps you may create wide paths from it, 
striving to make permissible earnings.” 

@ Noah said, “O my Lord! Indeed, my people 
have disobeyed me in what I have instructed them 
to do i.e. accepting Your oneness and worshipping 
You alone. The lowly among them have followed the nobles, whom You have favoured with wealth and offspring. Your 
favouring them has only increased them in their deviance.” 

Cj) The elders among them hatched a great plot by inciting the lowly against Noah. 

{§p They said to their followers, “Do not leave the worship of your deities: do not leave the worship of your idols Wadd, 
Suwa‘, Yaghuth and Nasr.” 

djj) “Verily, they have led the majority of people astray with these idols. O my Lord! Do not increase those who wrong 
themselves by persisting on disbelief and sins, except in further deviance from the truth.” 

djj) Due to the sins they committed, they were drowned by a flood in the world, and they were made to enter the hellfire 
immediately after their death. They did not find any helpers to save them from drowning or the hellfire. 
ijP And when Allah informed him that no one will ever bring faith from his people, except those had already brought 
faith, Noah said, “O my Lord! Do not leave any disbeliever walking or moving on earth.” 

@ “O my Lord! If you leave them and give them respite, they will lead your believing servants astray and will only 
give birth to more transgressors who will not obey You, or extreme ungrateful ones who will not show gratitude for Your 
favours.” 

@ “O my Lord! Forgive my sins, forgive my parents, and forgive the one who enters my house as a believer. Also 
forgive the believing men and women, and do not increase those who wrong themselves by disbelief and sins except in 
destruction and loss.” 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Seeking forgiveness is a means of rainfall and abundance in wealth and children. 

2. The role of the elders in leading the juniors astray is clearly evident. 

3. Sins are the cause of destruction in the world and facing a punishment in the afterlife. 



















The Jinn (Surah Al-Jinn) 



® Themes of the Surah: 

It focusses on confirming the revelation of the Qura 
by presenting the example of the faith of the Jinn, in 
order to refute the idolaters’ claims regarding them. 

® Explanation: 

@ Say, O Messenger, to your nation: Allah re¬ 
vealed to me that a group of Jinn listened to my 
recitation of the Qur’an in Batn Nakhla. When they 
went back to their people they said to them: We 
have heard a recited speech that is impressive in its 
clarity and eloquence. 

Cfjj) This speech that we heard guides to the correct 
belief, statements and actions, so we believed in it 
and we will not associate any partner with our Lord 
Who revealed it. 

CU We have believed that He - exalted be the gran¬ 
deur and majesty of our Lord - has not taken any 
wife nor child as the idolaters say. 

And that Iblis made an errant statement about 
Allah by attributing a wife and child to Him, may 
He be glorified. 

And that we thought that the idolaters from 
among mankind and the jinn were not speaking lies 
when they claimed that He had a wife and child, 
so we accepted their statement blindly following 
them. 

CJ} And that in the period of ignorance, some men 
from mankind used to seek protection in the jinn 
when they came to a frightening place. One of them 
would say: I seek protection in the leader of this 
valley from the evil of the foolish ones of his peo¬ 
ple. As a result, human beings became more afraid and terrified of the jinn. 

d5 And that humans thought as you did, O jinn, that Allah will not resurrect anyone after his death for the reckoning and 
recompense. 

@ And that we sought the news of the heaven and we found the sky full of stem guards, who were the angels, who guard¬ 
ed it from the eavesdropping that we used to do, and full of flaming fires thrown at everyone who comes close to the sky. 
CfJ) And that we in the past used to assume positions in the sky from where we could hear what the angels were deliberat¬ 
ing, and then we would convey this to the fortune-tellers on earth. Now things have changed. Anyone of us who now tries 
to listen finds a flaming fire ready for him. When he goes near, it is released on him and he is burnt by it. 

@) And that we do not know what is the cause of this stem guard, is it that evil is intended for those on earth, or does 
Allah intend good for them. News of the sky has been cut off from us. 

@ And that we - the group of jinn-: some of us are Allah-conscious and righteous whilst some of us are disbelievers and 
sinners. We are of different types and of diverse persuasions. 

@ And that we are certain that we cannot escape Allah, may He be glorified, when He intends some matter for us. We 
will never be able to escape Him by fleeing because He surrounds us. 

@ And that when we heard the Qur’an that guides to what is most upright we had faith in it. Whoever has faith in his 
Lord will not fear any loss of his good deeds and nor any sin that will be added to his prior sins. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The profound effect of the Qur’an on those who listen to it with a sound heart. 

2. Just as deviation is found in human beings it is also found in the jinn, in fact to a greater degree. 

3. Seeking help from the jinn is one of the forms of associating partners with Allah. 

4. The nullification of fortune telling after the mission of the Prophet (peace be upon him). 

5. One of the etiquettes of the believer is that he does not attribute evil to Allah. 


cJ o' AJi' (Jp [4^ JyH 

3 3S ot 

o 




























> 

o 



(^ tJs^^- 4 ^^\y ^S O^AA 
^t^)A\otl^ j^ZjlZj^ 4j1^4^ (Jp^A^AJiv^ 
ol? (^) ^ a& <^CL2l^. ^ ^~x^\ c^o^jr^ cy*j 

4j^\ _Cp^\i &/*§$ ($) A* £* \y<jG ^ ^ 

^i\ *^Jc43i^S\ 

(ji J 5 0 \lAjS|j ^>j>3 i\i^^ ci^js 0\os3 2* 

o^l^o 

6j -X^y IS Q^J§ (^)fe -^<J^ 


p. 




C $5 !A AS\S JA 3 C>5 L 9 ^SA 

e^il^^*io\ J5 A 4 j A_J 

A ^J^====eA^A I^j ^Aj ^45 

Al-Jinn 573 p S^jpf 7 ^ Part 29 


© And that some of us submit and follow Allah 
by obeying Him, and some of us go astray from the 
path of moderation and steadfastness. Those who 
submit to Allah by following him and doing right¬ 
eous actions, they are the ones who have sought 
after guidance and the right way. 

© Those who go astray from the path of modera¬ 
tion and steadfastness, they will be firewood that 
will be used to light the fire of Hell together with 
other human beings like them. 

© Just as I revealed to him that a group of the jinn 
listened to him, I revealed to him that if human 
beings and the jinn remained steadfast on the path 
of Islam, and practiced on what it contained, then 
Allah would have given them plenty water to drink 
and provided them with various blessings. 

© To test them in that, are they thankful for Allah’s 
favours or are they ungrateful for them? Whoever 
turns away from the Qur’an and the admonitions 
it contains, His Lord will enter him into a difficult 
punishment that he will not be able to bear. 

© And that the mosques belong to Him (may He 
be glorified) and not to anyone else. So do not call 
on anyone together with Allah and become like the 
Jews and the Christians in their synagogues and 
churches. 

© And that when Allah’s servant, Muhammad 
(peace be on him) stood up to worship His Lord 
in Batn Nakhla, the jinn were almost piled on top 
of him because of the huge crowd when they heard 
him reciting the Qur’an. 

© O Messenger! Say to these idolaters: I only call 
unto my Lord alone and I do not associate anyone 


else as partner to Him in worship, whoever he may be. 

© Say to them: I do not have any power to ward off any harm that Allah has decreed for you, nor do I have any power 
to draw any benefit that Allah has withheld from you. 

© Say to them: No one can save me from Allah if I go against Him, and I will never find any place of refuge to take 
refuge in besides Him. 

© But that which is in my power is to convey to you what Allah has instructed me to convey to you, and His message that 
He sent with me to you. Whoever goes against Allah and His messenger, his fate is entry into the fire of Hell to remain 
their forever and never come out. 

© The disbelievers will persist in their disbelief until when they see on the day of judgment the punishment that they 
were warned of in the world. At that time, they will come to know who has the weaker protector and they will come to 
know who has less helpers. 

© O Messenger! Say to these idolaters who reject the resurrection: I do not know whether the punishment you are 
warned of is near, or whether it has a fixed time that only Allah knows. 

© He (may He be glorified) is the knower of the Ghaib, all of it. Nothing of it is hidden from Him. He does not disclose 
His Ghaib to anyone, but keeps it in His exclusive knowledge. 

© Except for a messenger whom He, may He be glorified, selects and then discloses to him what He wishes. He sends 
guards from the angels to go before the messenger and protect him so that no one besides the messenger gains access to 
this. © This is done in the hope that the messenger may know that the messengers before him had conveyed the mes¬ 
sages of their Lord that He had instructed them to convey because of the care that Allah gave to it. Allah’s knowledge 
surrounds whatever is with the angels and messengers. Nothing of that is hidden from Him. He has counted the number 
of everything, so that nothing is hidden from Him, may He be glorified. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Injustice leads to entry into hellfire. 2. The importance of steadfastness in achieving good objectives. 

3. Going against Allah and His messenger leads to entry into hellfire. 4. Revelation is protected from interference by the 
satans by flames that are thrown at them if they attempt to listen. 


















The Covered Up One (Surah Al-Muzzammil) 




-j \ Qrd^J 

3^ ^y^Shj 33j^ 0 

^ 6^0!^Lis 

($) jQ^ 

JSy^3 0 o J^-ls^ J| / JLiJ\ o; 

Cr^ jScU V^ 

510^1^>4^4®S (Jj^ 

J^ <J2-4y j^.0 \j\ AyO^ ital*i^ 




*D' 


oio^-^ ^_j£^N5 (0 ^L r J s j\Jo-\ *£> -XpAs 

6\?$Js4 


^ Themes of the Surah: 

It focusses on the spiritual provision of callers to 
Allah in facing the difficulties and hardships of life, 
to strengthen the Prophet (peace be upon him) and 
to warn those who reject him. 

® Explanation: 

© O you wrapped up in your clothes (i.e. the 
Prophet (peace be upon him)). 

CP Offer prayer at night except for a little part of it. 

© Pray for half of it if you wish, or pray for a little 
less than half until you reach one third. 

© Or increase it until you reach two thirds. Make 
the Qur’an clear when you recite it and recite it 
slowly. 

© I am going to send down on you, O Messen¬ 
ger, the Qur’an, which is a heavy word, due to the 
obligations, limits, provisions, etiquettes etc. that it 
contains. 

© The hours of the night are more suited to the 
heart for recitation and more correct in speech. 

© In the day you are busy in your work, and are 
distracted from reciting the Qur’an, so pray at night. 

© Remember Allah with various forms of remem¬ 
brance, and devote yourself to Him (may He be 
glorified) fully by making your worship solely for 
Him. 

© The Lord of the East and the Lord of the West. 

There is none deserving of worship besides Him. J|1 ^ ^ A v < Tif Tf< ^ 9 l * S' ? 

So take Him as a Trustee Whom you rely on in all <£8 O^ 3 ayO^^aJ^A tygp | 

your affairs. 

© Be patient over the mockery and abuse uttered 
by those who deny, and leave them in a manner that causes no harm. 

© Do not be concerned about the state of those who deny, those who enjoy the pleasures of the world. Leave them to Me 
and wait a little for them until their appointed time comes. 

© In the afterlife, I have heavy chains and a blazing fire. 

© And a food that chokes the throats because of its extreme bitterness, and a painful punishment, in addition to the 
above. 

© That punishment will occur to those who deny on the day when the earth and the mountains will shake and the moun¬ 
tains will become scattered flowing sand because of its extreme horror. 

© I have sent to you a messenger as a witness over your actions on the day of judgment just as I sent to Pharaoh a mes¬ 
senger, who was Moses, (peace be upon him). 

© But Pharaoh went against the messenger who was sent to him from his Lord, so I punished him with a severe punish¬ 
ment in the world by drowning and in the afterlife by the punishment of the fire. So you do not go against your messenger 
or you will be afflicted by what afflicted him. 

© So how will you protect yourselves - if you reject Allah and deny His messenger - from a long, severe day that will 
make the head of young children white because of the severity of its horror and its length. 
jS> The sky will split because of its horror. Allah’s promise will be inevitably fulfilled. 

© This admonition - containing an exposition of the horror and severity of the day of judgment - is a reminder that is of 
benefit to the believers. So whoever wishes to take a path that leads to His Lord let him do so. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The importance of standing in prayer at night, reciting the Qur’an, remembering Allah, and being patient for the caller 
to Allah. 

2. Enduring difficulties and tests, requires an effective and strict nurturing. 

3. Luxury and an abundance of enjoyments is a barrier to Allah’s path. 


Al-Muzzammil 


574 

























tovo 




<sa ^j J^^5lS^/^Sk:6|fe 

'bJjX^a$^£s>^ &i&». ^Jf~\"t3 

^£j a^L^^Li^J 4ji\(Jw;^ (_|(jj\iSj 

4JiU^£\2 S^t 

liisp 


illB&£ 


d^J0 J^5ili O^^0 J>caS)^^5 

/“ z' ^ 

(JCj^ (^Gj aI 2» y U j olx>^ (^ Xi>^ 

/a>P^£) 1^\ ^ 

j^j^(^)\S^L^ _? AJL&3I1L ^) \ JuXP ^rd^O ^ E 




Al-Muzzammil 


575 


Part 29 


<0 Your Lord, O Messenger, knows that you 
sometimes spend less than two thirds of the night 
in prayer, sometimes you stand for half the night, 
sometimes a third, and a group of the believers 
stand with you. Allah determines the night and day 
and counts their hours. He (may He be glorified) 
knows that you are not able to count and keep a 
record of its hours, and thus standing for the most 
part of it seeking the required will be difficult for 
you. He therefore has accepted your repentance. 
So pray at night as much as is easy for you. Allah 
knows that some of you, O believers, may be ill 
and constrained by illness - others will be travelling 
seeking Allah’s provision, and others will be fight¬ 
ing the disbelievers seeking Allah’s pleasure and to 
promote Allah’s word. For these people standing in 
prayer at night is difficult, so pray at night as much 
as is easy for you and discharge the obligatory 
prayer in the most perfect manner. Give the char¬ 
ity of your wealth and spend from your wealth in 
Allah’s path. Whatever good you send forward for 
yourselves, you will find it to be better and greater 
in reward. Seek forgiveness from Allah. Allah For¬ 
giving towards those of His servants who repent 
and He is merciful to them. 

The Cloacked One (Surah Al-Muddathir) 


® Themes of the Surah: 

It focusses on the instruction to promote the call 
and its elements and to warn those who deny it. 

Explanation: 

© O you who is covered with his clothes (this re¬ 


fers to the Prophet (peace be upon him) 

© Arise and warn of Allah’s punishment. 

© Declare the greatness of your Lord. 

{J) Purify yourself from sins and your clothes from impurities. 

© Keep away from the worship of idols. 

© Do not think that you have done a favour to your Lord by regarding your righteous actions to be plenty. 

Cl) Be patient for Allah’s sake over the harm that you incur. 

Q3 When the trumpet will be blown a second time. 

© That day will be a severe day. 

© For those who reject Allah and His messengers it will not be easy. 

© Leave me, O Messenger, and the one whom I created alone in the womb of his mother without wealth or children 
(This refers to Walid bin A1 Mughira). 

© I gave him plenty wealth. 

© I gave him children who were present with him, who attended gatherings with him and who did not leave him on 
account of travel due to the abundance of his wealth. 

© I extended to him his livelihood, provision and children profusely. 

© Then despite his denial of Me he desires that I give him more after I gave him all of that. 

© The matter is not as he thinks. He was opposed to My verses that I revealed to My messenger denying them, 
fi. I will impose on him difficulty from a punishment that he will not be able to bear. 

© This disbeliever whom I bestowed with those favours thought about what he should say in order to refute the Qur’an, 
and planned this within himself. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Difficulties in affairs brings about ease in them. 

2. The necessity of purity from outward and inward filth. 

3. Bestowing a transgressor with favours is not honouring him; it is gradually leading him into destruction. 

























© So may he be cursed and punished. How did 
he plan! 

© Again, may he be cursed and punished. How 
did he plan! 

© Then he reconsidered and carefully thought 
about what he should say. 

© Then he frowned and scowled when he did not 
find anything to challenge the Qur’an with. 

© Then he turned away from faith and was too 
proud to follow the Prophet (peace be upon him). 

© He said: This what Muhammad brought is not 
Allah’s speech, but it is sorcery that he relates from 
others. 

© This is not Allah’s speech, but it is the speech 
of man. 

© I will enter this disbeliever into one of the levels 
of the Fire, which is Saqar, to suffer from its heat. 

© What will tell you, O Muhammad, what Saqar 
is?! 

© It does not spare any person that is punished in it 
except that it comes on him and does not leave him. 

Then he returns to how it was and it comes to him, 
again and again. 

© It severely burns and alters skins. 

© There are nineteen angels over it who are its 
wardens. 

© I did not make the wardens of the Fire except 
angels, so humans do not have the power to face 
them. Abu Jahl was lying when he and his people 
claimed that they have the ability to attack them 
and then they will come out of the Fire. I did not 
make this number of theirs except to test those who 
reject Allah, so that the Jews who were given the 
Torah and the Christians who were given the Gospel will become certain when the Qur’an that confirms what is in their 
scriptures is revealed, so that the faith of the believers increases when the people of the scripture agree with them and 
the Jews, Christians and the believers do not have any doubt, and so that those who waver in faith and those who are 
disbelievers say: What does Allah intend by this strange number?! Just as those who deny this number are misguided 
and those who accept it are guided, Allah misguides whoever He wishes to misguide and He guides whoever He wishes 
to guide. No one knows the forces of your Lord, because of their huge number, besides Him, may He be glorified. So 
let Abu Jahl who, mockingly and dismissively, said, “Does Muhammad only have nineteen aides?!” know this. The Fire 
is only a reminder for human beings, through which they can come to know of Allah’s greatness, may He be glorified. 
© The statement is not as claimed by some idolaters that he will suffice his companions against the wardens of Hell and 
take them out of it. Allah took an oath by the moon. © He took an oath by the night when it departs. © He took an oath 
by the morning when it lights up. © The fire of Hell is one the great calamities. © In order to strike terror and fear in 
people. © Whoever from amongst you, O people, wishes to go forward with faith in Allah and righteous actions, or to lag 
behind by disbelief and sins. © Every soul will be taken to task for the actions that it did. Either its actions will destroy 
it or they will release and rescue it from destruction. © Except for the believers, who wont be taken to task for their sins. 
Instead, these will be overlooked because of their righteous actions. © On the Day of Judgement, they will be in gardens 
asking one another. © About the disbelievers who destroyed themselves by the sins they committed. © They will say to 
them: What entered you into Hell? © The disbelievers will answer them saying: We were not of those who discharged 
the obligatory prayer in the worldly life. © We did not feed the poor from what Allah gave us. © We used to be with the 
people of falsehood and go wherever they go. We used to speak to the people of misguidance and deviation. © We used 
to deny the day of recompense. © We persisted in this denial until death came to us and prevented us from repenting. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Man’s responsibility for his actions in the world and the afterlife. 2. Not feeding those in need is one of the causes for 
entrance into the fire. 


I 0 ^ ^ ^ ■" " 

\ blx>b5 <^0£btal 

ibo 2$ tab 


05 






576 
















KLjkVojy** 


0VV5 




~^jiS> ot^y 0 c^jlx^ 

6^ l^Sl z^j&A jJrJp (j^3to \& 

I W3 d?0 "tP ^ J ^ 

0;^^\S4j &J&\S^)j* ^£2* cM 



O^ y.Qj^Uaf^^-^ \ O^V ^ 

(3/. \ Q^ai^ £j>jSl&\ J^$jLU^>ekJ ^ J^> 

O^GySQjJ$^\ ^0J^^J0J^' 

^Oy^ Y d && 

ix^iko oil^) 2 ^ J^uc^IA^Laj (^Li^iW> \jJ_5 

H 0jAiCH£35'^0j^^ ^|^^^\i^0 J ^\^ J 4^- j 


Al-Qiyama 


577 


Part 29 


{J) On the Day of Judgment, the mediation of inter¬ 
cessors from the angels, prophets and pious ones, 
will not benefit them, because the requirement for 
the acceptance of intercession is that the thing for 
which intercession is made must be approved. 

@ What has made these idolaters turn away from 
the Qur’an?! 

{j| As if they, in their turning away from and aver¬ 
sion to it, are wild donkeys that are extremely re¬ 
sistant. 

@ That have fled from a lion out of fear for it. 

{§S Instead, each one of these idolaters wants for 
there to be an open book by his head side that tells 
him that Muhammad is a messenger from Allah. 
The reason for this is not the lack of proof or weak¬ 
ness of evidence. It is only obstinacy and pride. 
@ The matter is not like that. In fact, the reason for 
their persistence in their misguidance is that they do 
not have faith in the punishment of the afterlife, so 
they remained in their disbelief. 

{§} Indeed, this Qur’an is an admonition and a re¬ 
minder. 

{§p Whoever wishes to read the Qur’an and take les¬ 
son from it does so. 

((§} None takes lesson from it besides those whom 
Allah wills to take lesson. He (may He be glorified) 
is worthy of being mindful of by the fulfilment of 
His instructions and the avoidance of His prohibi¬ 
tions. He is worthy of forgiving the sins of His serv¬ 
ants when they repent to Him. 


The Rising (Surah Al-Qiyama) 


® Themes of the Surah: 

It focusses on showing Allah’s power to gather man’s body and resurrect it. 

® Explanation: 

(JJ) Allah took an oath by the Day of Judgement when people stand before the Lord of the worlds. 

@ He took an oath by the pure soul that reproaches its owner for falling short in righteous deeds and for doing wrong 
deeds. He took an oath by these two things that He will certainly resurrect people for reckoning and recompense. 

(Sj) Does man think that I will not gather his bones to be resurrected after he dies?! (Jj Indeed, I am able together with 
gathering them to restore his fingertips in a proportionate form just as they were. @ But man by his denial of the resurrec¬ 
tion wants to continue sinning in the future unchecked. © He skeptically asks about the Day of Judgement: When will it 
occur? © When the sight is dazzled and astonished at the time when it sees what it used to deny. © And the light of the 
moon disappears. @ And the mass of the sun and the moon are brought together. @ The sinning person will say on that 
day: Where is the escape?! @ There is no escape on that day and there is no place in which the sinner can take refuge nor 
any place that he can seek protection in. @ The return and destination on that day will be to your Lord, O Messenger, for 
the reckoning and recompense. @ On the day man will be informed about the actions that he sent forward and those that 
he left behind. @ Instead, man is a witness against himself as his limbs will testify against him in respect of the sins he 
committed. @ Even if he brings excuses to argue on behalf of himself that he did not do any evil, these will not benefit 
him. @ Do not move your tongue, O Messenger, with the Qur’an hastily for fear of its escaping from you. @ It is My 
duty to gather it in your chest and to establish its recitation on your tongue. @ When Gabriel has completed its recitation 
to you, then be attentive and listen to its being recited. @ Then, it is My duty to explain it to you. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The servant’s will is restricted by Allah’s will. 2. The desire of the Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him) to mem¬ 
orise whatever of the Qur’an was revealed to him. Allah assured him that He will gather it fully in his chest and memory 
and that he will not forget any part of it. 






























OVA 




(yp Nay, the matter is not as you claimed about the 
impossibility of resurrection. You know that the 
One Who was able to create you the first time is 
not unable to bring you back to life after you die. 

However, the reason for your denial of resurrection, 
is your love for the fleeting life of the world. @ 

And your disregard for the life of the afterlife, the 
path of which is to carry out the acts of obedience 
that Allah has instructed you to and to leave the un¬ 
lawful acts that He has prohibited you from, (jjj) The 
faces of the people of faith and fortune on that day 
will be radiant with light. @ Looking at their Lord 
with enjoyment. (jp The faces of the people of dis¬ 
belief and wretchedness on that day will be gloomy. 

@ They will be sure that a great punishment and 
painful punishment is to come down on them. (Sjj) 

The matter is not as the idolaters imagined - that 
they will not be punished when they die. When the 
soul of any one of them reaches the upper part of 
his chest. (jp And people say to one another: Who 
can heal this person, perhaps he can be cured?! 

{J) The person in agony will be certain at that time 
that this is the departure from the world by death. 

(jp Difficulties will come together at the time when 
the world ends and the afterlife commences. @ 

When this occurs, the deceased will be driven to his 
Lord. @) The disbeliever did not accept what his 
messenger brought to him, nor did he pray to Allah, 
may He be glorified. (S§p Instead, he denied what his 
messenger brought to him and turned away from it. 

@ Then this disbeliever went to his family swag¬ 
gering in his gait out of pride, (jp Allah thus warned 
the disbeliever that His punishment has come close 
to him. djj) He then repeated the sentence by way of emphasis and stated: 


“Again, closer and closer it comes to you.” 

(§p Does man think that Allah will leave him neglected without imposing any laws on him? @ Was this human being 
one day not a drop of sperm spilt into the womb. {jp Thereafter he was a piece of coagulated blood. Then Allah created 
him and made his form proportionate, (jp Then he made his species into two types: Male and female?! @) Is not the One 
Who created man from a drop, then a clot, able to give life once again to the dead for the reckoning and recompense?! 
Indeed, He is able to do so. 


l^ l)10 

^ ^ ‘KjAc- 

11111 “ 






Part 29 


Al-Insan 




578 


The Human (Surah Al-Insan) 

® Themes of the Surah: 

It focusses on reminding man of his origin, the wisdom behind his creation and his fate in both the worlds, and on show¬ 
ing the bliss of Paradise in order to strengthen the believers and invite the disbelievers. 

® Explanation: 

(Jj) A long period of time has passed over man when he was non-existent and there was no mention of him. (j} I created 
man from a drop that was a mixture of the liquid of a man and a woman, to test him with the impositions I placed on 
him. I made him hearing and seeing to carry out the laws I imposed on him. (jp I showed him, through the tongues of 
My messengers, the path of guidance and by that the path of misguidance became clear to him. Thereafter he is either 
guided to the straight path and becomes a believing servant that is thankful to Allah, or he is misled from it and becomes 
a disbelieving servant who rejects Allah’s signs. @ After Allah mentioned the two types, those who are guided and those 
astray, he mentioned the reward of each by saying: I have prepared for those who reject Allah and His messengers, chains 
by which they will be dragged into the fire, and iron collars that will be tied around their necks, and a blazing fire. 

@ The believers who follow Allah will drink on the day of judgment from a filled cup of wine mixed with camphor 
because of its pleasant fragrance. 

® Beneficial Points: 1. The danger of love of the world and neglect of the afterlife. 2. The establishment of choice for 
man, which is Allah’s showing honour to him. 





























OJJ+* 


0V<\ 




0 -^ 4^5 ' 

<2J5L?j, s3Sj 


C^Lubl^ 


Sir 


I O^JcJuo 1 






L^/C^iL^ 22 " 


(0) This drink that has been prepared for the people 
of obedience will be from a easily palatable, abun¬ 
dantly flowing spring which will not dry out. The 
servants of Allah will drink to their fill from it, and 
be able to cause it to flow and run wherever they 
wish. 

@) The attributes of the servants who will drink 
from it, are that they fulfil the acts of obedience 
to Allah they have imposed upon themselves, and 
they fear a day of widespread calamity: The Day 
of Judgement. 

(S{) They also feed food, despite being in the state 
of loving food due to being needy and desirous of 
it. They feed it to the poor, orphans and captives, 
(jj They conceal within themselves that they only 
feed them for the pleasure of Allah; not intending 
to receive any recompense from those whom they 
have fed, nor any praise. 

@ We fear from our Lord a day on which the faces 
of the wretched will be gloomy due to its severity 
and horror. 

@ So Allah will protect them through His grace 
from the harm of that great day, and will give them 
beauty and light on their faces in their honour, to¬ 
gether with placing happiness in their hearts. 

@ And Allah will reward them due to their endur¬ 
ance upon acts of obedience, patience upon the de¬ 
crees of Allah, and resolve from committing sins, 
with a Paradise in which they shall live in luxury, 
wearing clothes made of silk. 

@ They will be reclining in it on decorated couch¬ 
es. They will not see in this Paradise a sun to be in¬ 
convenienced by its rays, nor will they experience 
extreme cold; rather they will be in constant shade, without extreme heat or cold. 

@ Its shade will be near to them, and its fruits will be made subservient to whoever eats them, making them easy to 
access and eat, such that a person lying down, sitting or standing will be able to eat them. 

<jj)) Servants will roam around them with silver utensils and clear glasses whenever they intend to drink. 

jj§) In their clear colour, they will be like glass, yet they will be made of silver, and they will be measured to perfection: 

neither bigger or smaller than they intend. 

(Sjj) These honoured people will be given a glass of wine to drink, mixed with ginger. 
jjS> They will also drink from a spring in Paradise named Salsabll. 

dj) And youthful children will roam around them in Paradise. When you see them you will think of them to be scattered 
pearls, because of the freshness in their faces, their beautiful complexions, their number and their distinction. 

C|| When you see what is in Paradise, you will see undescribable luxury and a magnificent kingdom that is unparalleled. 
@ Magnificent green clothes will adorn their upper bodies, made of fine silk and silk brocade. They will also be made to 
wear silver bracelets, and Allah will give them to drink, a drink free of any spoiling. 

@ It will be said to them in their honour: “Indeed, this luxury you have been given is a reward for you for your good 
deeds; your deeds were acceptable with Allah.” 

(ffi) O Messenger! Indeed, I have revealed the Qur’an to you in segments; I did not reveal it to you all at once. 

So be patient over what Allah decrees or legislates, and do not follow the sinner in the sin he calls towards, nor the 
disbeliever in the disbelief he invites towards. 

@ And remember your Lord by performing the Fajr prayer at the starting of the day, and the Zuhr and ‘Asr prayers at 
its end. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Fulfilling a vow, feeding the needy, sincerity in action and fearing Allah are all means to achieving salvation from the 
hellfire and entering Paradise. 


I ij>o (Q^yi£=====>j\ £5)^41* I 


Al-Insan 


579 


Part 29 


















ajj^ 



0A* 




.x^Zi Is yJ 1 'iyCs 

£L®^-P, 

)>4\ Ji£^ c\-A>y£ 6^Sj^o-Xl& 

($)l!2Jj Gap^ 4^ Jc3 


mm& 



Q^0&cX*p^ 


^ 0 £ 43 '£& 

0^3 lL»JlM \3kq 0 oI^i?j»«pcJi\^ 0 h*^^ OJ^Xcy 

cl£ 

<itjS\ \ 330 (J- 4 ^ yJ 0 
o^j^r^\44*^j.y 0 44/^3 yyy) 1 0 o^j^aj. 


© And remember Him by performing the two 
prayers of the night: The Maghrib and Tsha prayers, 
together with performing Tahajjud after them. 

© Indeed, these idolaters love the worldly life and 
are greedy for it, leaving behind them the Day of 
Judgement which is a burdensome day due to the 
difficulties and tests in it. 

© I have created them and strengthened their cre¬ 
ation by giving strength in their joints, limbs etc. 

And if I wanted to destroy them and replace them 
with people like them, I would have done so. 

© Indeed, this Surah is a piece of advice and a re¬ 
minder; whoever wishes to take it as a path to the 
pleasure of his Lord should do so. 

© You do not wish to take the path to the pleas¬ 
ure of Allah except that Allah also wishes that from 
you, because the matter is fully in His control. In¬ 
deed, Allah knows the requirements of His servants 
and what they do not require; He is wise in His cre¬ 
ation, decree and legislation. 

© He enters whichever of His servants He wishes 
into His mercy, granting them the ability to bring 
faith and do good deeds. He has also prepared for 
those who oppress themselves by disbelieving and 
committing sins, a painful punishment in the after¬ 
life: the punishment of the hellfire. 

The Winds Sent Forth (Surah Al-Mursalat) 

® Themes of the Surah: 

Emphasis on proving the Day of Judgment through «^jj 
countering the deniers with proofs, and following it 
up with warnings and threats. 

® Explanation: 

© Allah takes an oath on the constant winds, like the mane of a horse. 

© And He also takes an oath on the severely blowing winds. 

© And also on the winds that disperse the rain. 

© And He also takes an oath on the angels that descend with that which differentiates between truth and falsehood. 

© And He also takes an oath on the angels who descend bringing revelation. 

© They descend bringing revelation as a warning from Allah so that He is excused, and warning the people of the pun¬ 
ishment of Allah. 

© Indeed, the resurrection, accounting and requital you have been promised is to happen, inevitably. 

© When it happens, the stars will suddenly lose their shine, and their light will be extinguished. 

, | The sky will suddenly crack because of the angels descending from it. 

© The mountains will be suddenly uprooted from their places, and will be made to break up into pieces until they be¬ 
come like dust particles. © And the Messengers will be gathered for a fixed time. © For a great day which has been 
delayed, so that they can testify against their nations. @ For the day of separation between the servants, so that the true 
can be made clear from the false, and the fortunate from the wretched. © O Messenger! What do you know of the day 
of separation? © Destruction, punishment and loss on that day will be for the rejectors who rejected whatever the Mes¬ 
sengers brought from Allah. © Did I not destroy the previous nations when they disbelieved in Allah and rejected their 
Messengers? © Then I followed the rejectors up by sending the later ones into the world, and then destroyed them just as 
I destroyed those before them. © Like My destruction of those nations, I will destroy the criminals who reject that which 
Muhammad (peace be upon him) has brought. © Destruction, punishment and loss on that day will be for the rejectors 
of the warning of Allah of the punishment for the criminals. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Attachment to the world and forgetting the afterlife is dangerous. 

2. The servant’s will is subservient to Allah’s will. 

3. Destroying those nations who denied is a divine practice. 


'80 


Al-Mursalat 


Part 29 




























5 ($)'i 3 \^'*\S ^&jLZ)j c2J>z^j 
iS i (ddj^d* 5 ^ ($1 il^JyNS l£ £l (^\3jAdai\ 

jd-d^c^ %$> 0 v*^ 

^jj\j& 


1303 


t 




13 


0^ 


\ di$) O^^-^.O^^^diS 1 0 d-3 -^^d 

Oj^oldJLj <*^^5 ^ 0_^^3 d-^ d 


OM 


5 &JL 


+c*y. 


j Mj 0 c>J^^\ 

\ »dJ dr^) i' r rb dr^jl 

I 0O«>^j S djo ^.Jv^dld(^dvd^==tddo^d3!.di3 


<0 O people! Did I not create you from a small 
amount of despised fluid, i.e. a drop of semen? 
(0 I then put that contemptuous fluid into a safe 
place i.e. the woman’s womb. 

(0 For a known period of time, i.e. the duration of 
pregnancy. 

0 I then decreed the attributes of that child, its fate, 
colour etc., so I am a greatly capable of all that. 

@ Destruction, punishment and loss on that day 
will be for the rejectors of the capability of Allah. 
@ Did I not make the earth capable of holding all 
the people? 

(0 It holds their living by letting them live and 
populate it, and their dead by allowing them to be 
buried in it. 

@ I also placed high, rooted mountains on it that 
stop it from shaking. And O people! I provide you 
with sweet water to drink. So whoever created all 
that is not incapable of resurrecting you. 

(0 Destruction, punishment and loss on that day 
will be for the rejectors of the favours of Allah. 
(0 It will be said to those who rejected whatever 
their Messengers brought: “O rejectors! Walk to the 
punishment you used to reject.” 

0 “Walk to the shadow of the smoke of the hell- 
fire, which is split into three parts” 

0 “There is no coolness of shade in it, nor does it 
stop the flares of the hellfire or its heat from reach¬ 
ing you.” 

(0 Indeed, the hellfire spits out sparks, each spark 
like a palace in size. 

(0 It is as if the sparks that it spits out are black 
mountains in their darkness and size. 

0 Destruction, punishment and loss on that day will be for the rejectors who rejected whatever the Messengers brought 
from Allah. 

0 This is a day on which they will not speak at all. 

0 Neither will they be given permission to present excuses to their Lord for their disbelief and evils. 

0 Destruction, punishment and loss on that day will be for the rejectors of the news of this day. 

0 This is the day of separation between the creations; I have gathered you and the previous nations on one plain. 

0 So if you have a plan that you may execute to save yourselves from My punishment, try it. 

0 Destruction, punishment and loss on that day will be for the rejectors of the day of separation. 

0 Indeed, those who are mindful of their Lord by fulfilling His commands and refraining from the things he has not 
allowed, they will be in the extending shade of the trees of Paradise, and among sweet, flowing springs. 

0 And among fruits they desire to eat. 

0 And it will be said to them: “Eat from the good, and drink a pleasant, unspoiled drink in return for your good deeds 
in the world.” 

0 Just as I have requited you with this requital, I requite all those who do good deeds. 

0 Destruction, punishment and loss on that day will be for the rejectors of whatever Allah has prepared for the Mindful. 
0 And it will be said to the rejectors: “Eat and enjoy the tasty things of life for a short time in the world; you are indeed, 
criminals due to your disbelief in Allah and rejection of His Messengers.” 

0 Destruction, punishment and loss on that day will be for the rejectors of their requital on the day of recompense. 

0 When these rejectors are told: “Perform prayer for Allah”, they do not pray to Him. 

0 Destruction, punishment and loss on that day will be for the rejectors who rejected whatever the Messengers brought 
from Allah. 0 So when they do not bring faith in this Qur’an that was revealed from their Lord, what other speech will 
they bring faith in? 

Beneficial Points: 

1. Allah looks after the human in the mother’s womb. 

2. The earth is vast enough for those that live upon it that are living, and those within it who are dead. 






















V5L$^(^\^V^^C^\\^^OV^QJ^\\5l^^01 

05IJj©? ^) L^-La^W^/^ 1 ($5 ^ ^ -AO \j£y^^3jP 

C^-^J {^)\j tjjj \Ss>-* 2.A) 7^J>zl^ (^*) \cA^t\j^ C^pdOxQ \ 

_J>r^ \ 3> ^ ^ 

Ojr^A_J (^)t^y . \ C2>^S Ha-HM \ oylii 

^^>5 © 0 10 <Jt^4J 


The Great News (Surah Al-Naba’) 

® Themes of the Surah: 

Emphasis on proving the resurrection and requital 
through proof and evidence. 

® Explanation: 

© What are these idolaters asking one another 
about, after Allah has sent His Messenger (peace be 
upon him) to them? 

© They are asking each other about the great news. 

It is this Qur’an that has been revealed to their Mes¬ 
senger, which contains the news of the resurrection. 

© This Qur’an that they differ in how they should 
describe it: is it sorcery, poetry, fortune-telling or 
the tales of old? 

© The matter is not as they claim. These rejectors 
of the Qur’an will soon know the evil outcome of 
their rejection. 

© Then, that will be reemphasised for them. 

© Did I not make the earth spread out evenly for 
them so that it is fit for them to live on? 

© And did I not put mountains on it like pegs to 
stop it from shaking? 

© And O people! I created you of different types: 
some of you are males while others are females. 

© And I made your sleep the end point of your 
activeness, so that you may rest. 

© And I made the night a cover for you with its 
darkness, like a garment that you cover your private 
parts with. 

© And I made the day a field for earning and find¬ 
ing provision. 

© And I made above you seven, solid skies, per¬ 
fect in their creation. 

© And I made the sun an extremely bright and hot lamp. 

© And I sent some clouds for which the time has come to pour down with abundant rain. 

© So that through it I can extract different types of grains and crops. 

© And extract gardens that entwine with one another due to the closeness of the branches of their trees. 

© After Allah mentioned these blessings that prove His power, He followed it up with mention of the resurrection and 
the Day of Judgement, because the one who is capable of creating these blessings is also capable of resurrecting the dead 
and taking them to account. He says: Indeed, the day of separation between the creation was appointed and fixed on a 
time that will not change. 

© On that day, the angel will blow into the horn the second time, upon which, O people, you shall come in groups. 

© And the sky will open up; it will have gaps like open doors. 

© And the mountains will be made to move until they become like dispersed dust particles; becoming like a mirage. 

© Indeed, hell is watchful, lying in wait. 

© For the oppressors, as a point of return they will be made to return to. 

© Wherein they shall stay for endless ages and years. 

© They will not experience cold breezes in it that will cool them from the heat of the blaze, nor will they taste any drink 
that they will enjoy. © They will only taste extremely hot water, and the flowing pus of the people of hell. © As a re¬ 
quital in accordance to the disbelief and deviance they were on. © Indeed, in the world, they did not fear the Allah taking 
them to account in the afterlife, because they did not bring faith in the resurrection. So if they had feared the resurrection, 
they would have brought faith in Allah and performed good deeds. © And they vehemently rejected My verses I revealed 
to My Messenger. © I recorded and counted each of their deeds; they are all written in their books of deeds. © O trans¬ 
gressors! So endure this everlasting punishment; I will not increase you except in punishment upon your punishment. 

<*} Beneficial Points: 

1. The blessings of Allah upon His servants are numerous. 2. Transgression is a cause of entering the hellfire. 3. The 
punishment will be doubled on the disbelievers. 


































eoat 


'oj-m&i 


s-UaP iiC3 l y^y>- (^jlj' l^s Ojk^jS)! (^)li 1 La j 

o£&$ ( ’JiH )3 Cj>j 0K^ 

o^ iS^V^3^ ^ A^^QA 5 ^o ^ £>Wi, 

i\&o£ ipdt 






tws^ 


0^9' ^ c£<&% 

_^ *£. _x. ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ 

^ (^J^\X-\ dZQj^J ^ Oj^d 

\_(^)^y j^j <3w\)-*($} 


Al-Naba 


583 


@ Indeed, for those who are mindful of their Lord 
by fulfilling His commands and refraining from the 
things he has not allowed, there is a point of suc¬ 
cess they will succeed on, by achieving the Para¬ 
dise they sought. 

{§} It is full of gardens and grapevines. 

(jp And women of similar ages. {§} And full glasses 
of wine. @ In Paradise, they will not hear any false 
speech, nor lies. Neither will they lie to one anoth¬ 
er. {§} All that will be from what Allah will give 
to them in graciousness and benevolence, and it 
will be sufficient for them. @ He is the Lord of the 
heavens, the earth and whatever is between them; 
the benevolent of the world and the afterlife. No 
one on earth or in the heavens is able to question 
Him except when He gives them permission. {§} On 
the day when Gabriel and the angels will stand in 
rows, not speaking to intercede on behalf of any¬ 
one except whom the Benevolent grants them per¬ 
mission to intercede for, and has made a straight 
statement i.e. the statement of oneness of Allah. @) 
That which has been described to you is the day in 
which there is no doubt regarding its occurrence. 
So whoever wishes salvation on it from the punish¬ 
ment of Allah, he should take the path to it through 
performing good deeds that will please his Lord. @) 
O people! Indeed, I have warned you of an impend¬ 
ing punishment which will occur on the day when 
a person will see what deeds he sent forth in the 
world, and the disbeliever will say, wishing safety 
from the punishment: “If only I had become dust 
like the animals!” when it is said to them on the 
Day of Judgement: “Become dust”. 


Those who Pull Out (Surah Al-Nazi 6 at) 


® Themes of the Surah: 

Emphasis on shaking the hearts rejecting the resurrection and requital, through presenting the visions of death, resurrec¬ 
tion, the gathering and judgement. 

® Explanation: 

© Allah takes an oath on the angels who pull out the souls of the disbelievers with severity and harshness. @ And He 
also takes an oath on the angels who gently remove the souls of the believers with ease and smoothness. @ He also takes 
an oath on the angels who float from the heavens to the earth, by the command of Allah. @ And He also takes an oath 
on the angels who compete with one another to carry out the command of Allah. @ He also takes an oath on the angels 
who execute the decree of Allah that He has commanded them to, i.e. the angels appointed to the deeds of the servants. 
He takes an oath on all that, that He will definitely resurrect them for accounting and requital. @ On the day when the 
earth will tremble upon the first blowing of the horn. @ The second blow will follow it. {J} The hearts of some people 
will be fearful on that day. @ The effects of humiliation will be apparent on their faces. jj§) They would say: “Will we be 
returned to life after we have died?” @ “When we will become decomposed, empty bones, will we be returned then?!” 
@ They say: “If we are returned, that return will be a loss, and the person returning will be defrauded.” @ The matter 
of the resurrection is easy. It will only be a single scream from the angel appointed to blow. @ Then suddenly, everyone 
will be alive on the face of the earth, after they were dead within it. @ O Messenger! Has the news of Moses, his Lord 
and enemy, Pharaoh, come to you? @ When his Lord may He be glorified called out to him at the blessed valley of Tuwa. 
® Beneficial Points: 

1. Allah-consciousness is the cause of entry into Paradise. 2. Everything in Paradise is good and beneficial. 3. A disbe¬ 
liever will desire that he become dust like the animals, who will be told on the Day of Judgement: “Become dust”. 

4. The soul of the disbeliever will be taken with severity and harshness, while the soul of the believer will be taken with 
kindness and gentleness. 



























| a 


0 A £ -£ 



jS 2 ^9 <—> J^-S C^L $ \^ \ Aj 

lXj> AS(^]^J \0>J& J 

{^) ^1.01(3) ^4^ 

($) ^&\&{fc3[} iS^iSv^k 

(^l^^cSSp Jjo 

p^i \jOJLa 


lo^> 


'JCj^P. 




„ <*>' 


olSvjj?® \i5j($)cl$5l^ \ 6^ (™)C ^ 

L$j\d\ l^cX-\ o\? ($) lS^-^ ^ ^ 

{^}V^X_-uO^/3 OL)^ A^\_J^ \ ^J&^^hj\jLLxA (!j^l} 

I xJ 3M\0££J> Jxg 

^ aHjlp^ IV^Ajj3 ^jy^y^4^==^ 0 


@ Among the things He said to him was: “Go to 
Pharaoh; indeed, he has trespassed the limits of op¬ 
pression and arrogance.” 

@ “Then say to him: “O Pharaoh! Do you want to 
purify yourself from disbelief and sins?” 

@ “I will guide you to your Lord who has created 
you and provided for you so that you can fear Him 
and act according to His pleasure, together with re¬ 
fraining from things that cause His wrath.” 

@ Moses (peace be upon him) then showed him 
the great miracle that proved he was a Messenger 
from his Lord, i.e. the Hand and the Staff. 

@ Pharaoh did not do anything except reject these 
signs, and disobeyed the instruction Moses (peace 
be upon him) gave to him. 

{§} He then turned away from bringing faith in what 
Moses had brought. 

@ And turned his attention to mobilising his ar¬ 
mies to overpower Moses. He called out to his peo¬ 
ple, saying: 

(jp “I am your highest Lord; you are not to be obe¬ 
dient to anyone except me.” 

(Jj) So Allah seized him and punished him in the 
world by drowning him in the sea, and He will pun¬ 
ish him in the afterlife by entering him into the se¬ 
verest punishment. 

(jjj) Indeed, in My punishing of Pharaoh in the world 
and the afterlife, there is admonition for the one 
who fears Allah, because it is he who benefits from 
the admonitions. 

@ O rejectors of the resurrection! Is your origina¬ 
tion, or the origination of the heavens that He has 
created, harder for Allah? 

Cj) He raised the peak of the heaven vertically, and made it smooth: there is no break, crack or defect in it. 

Cj) And He darkened its night when the sun set, while manifesting its light when it rose. 

@ As for the earth after He created the heavens, He spread it out and placed within it its benefits. 

d§p He extracted water from it in the form of flowing springs, and made plants grow on it which the livestock graze. 

Cj) And He made the mountains stand firm on the earth. 

@ O people! All that is for your benefit, and for the benefit of your livestock. So whoever created all that, is not incapable 
of recreating you anew. 

(Sjl So when the second blowing will come, which will cover everything with its terror, and the judgement will occur. 

(jj) On the day when it will come, the human will remember what deeds he sent forth: whether good or bad. 

And hell will be brought and unveiled clearly for all to see. 
dj) As for the one who transgressed the limits into deviance. 

CjD And gave priority to the temporary worldly life over the everlasting afterlife. 

Then indeed, the hellfire is his abode he will take shelter towards. @ @ And as for the one who feared his standing 

before his Lord and stopped himself from following his desires that were made impermissible by Allah, then Paradise is 
his abode he will take shelter towards. @ O Messenger! These rejectors of the resurrection ask you: “When will the Hour 
occur?” @ You do not have any knowledge regarding it that you can mention to them; nor is it befitting of your duty to, 
because your duty is only to prepare for it. @ The total knowledge of the Hour is with your Lord alone. @ You are only a 
wamer to the one who fears the Hour, because he is the one who benefits from your warning. @ It is as if on the day they 
see the Hour for themselves, they will not have remained in their worldly lives except for a single evening or morning. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. It is obligatory to be kind when addressing the one you are inviting. 2. Pharaoh claimed divinity. 3. The punishment of 
the transgressors is a lesson for those who take heed. 4. Fearing Allah and stopping oneself from fulfilling impermissible 
desires is one of the causes of entering Paradise. 5. The knowledge of the Hour is from the Ghaib that only Allah knows. 






























Surah ‘Abasa (He Frowned) 





\s(£)(£3 uJL\ ^ \2\(^2sJuJ V A^CC3^j^j\ 
<~pc4 >(JaIpcE^Is 

($li .J/-5JoL> (^) ^a^O» 

^uUfli ^ ($L A2 l^£c9^ Oi0jo^sJ \a \ JjS 

\ o^sl^j 4jLa\^^^j ^ -XaBj Ajaii- 

2 : A 5 WL \ 

i^ULbls(^i£ii/ j*£j \ 

\jtS0^ 

J^jO ^tPi? A ($J Ari )j A A5I? fjjp 

J >/*S „ -t 

A_2oo (jLi 




^ Themes of the Surah: 

Emphasis on the reality of the message of the 
Qur’an, its nobility and its high rank, together with 
the nobility of the one who benefits from it, and the 
wretchedness of the one who turns away from it. 

® Explanation: 

@) The Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him) 
frowned and turned away. 

@ Because of the arrival of ‘Abdullah ibn Umm 
Maktum who came asking for guidance. He was 
blind, and had come when the Messenger (peace be 
upon him) was busy with the seniors of the idola¬ 
ters, hoping they would be guided. 

<0 O Messenger! What do you know, maybe this 
blind man may be purified of his sins? 

@ Or that he may take heed of the advices he hears 
from you and benefit from them? 
jjj) As for those who feel they have no need to bring 
faith in what you have brought, due to the wealth 
they possess. @ You persevere behind them and 
are attentive to them. What blame will there be 
on you if he is not purified of his sins by not repent¬ 
ing to Allah? {JS> As for the one who comes to you 
running, searching for goodness, (jj) And he fears 
his Lord. @ You are preoccupied from him with 
others i.e. the senior idolaters. @ It should not be 
like that; it is only admonition and a reminder for 
those who pay attention. @ So whoever wishes to 
remember Allah should remember Him, and take 
heed of what is in this Qur’an. @ Because this 
Qur’an is in blessed scrolls, with the angels. 

@) They are raised on a high place, pure; no dirt or filth reaches them. @ And they are in the hands of Messengers among 
the angels. @ They are honourable in the eyes of their Lord, frequent performers of goodness and obedience. @ The 
disbelieving human is cursed; how severe is his disbelief in Allah! (jp) What substance did Allah create him from, that 
he has the right to display arrogance on earth and disbelieve in Him?! (jp) He created him from a small amount of fluid, 
and managed his creation in stages. <§} Then after these stages, He made the exit from his mother’s belly easy for him. 
@ Then, after spending the amount of life decreed for him, Allah caused death upon him and made a grave for him 
wherein he remains until he is resurrected. @ Then, when He wishes. He will resurrect him for accounting and requital. 
@ It is not like this disbeliever imagines: that he has fulfilled the rights of Allah upon him, because he has not fulfilled 
the obligatory actions Allah put upon him. @ So the human who disbelieves in Allah should look at the food he eats: how 
did he come to acquire it? @ It originates from the rain descending from the sky with force and in abundance. 

(SjJ) Then, I split open the earth, so it springs forth with plants. @ I then make grains grow on it, i.e. wheat, corn etc. 

{J) And I make fresh grapes and fodder grow on it, so it can be feed for your livestock. @ And I also make olives and 
date palms grow on it. @ I also make abundant gardens and trees grow on it. @ And I make fruits grow on it, together 
with things your livestock graze. @ For your benefit, and the benefit of your livestock, (jj) So when the great shriek will 
come that will deafen the ears i.e. the second blowing. @ On that day a person will run from his brother. @ And he will 
run from his parents. {§} And he will run from his wife and children. Each one of them will be in a state where he will 
be preoccupied from them due to the extreme anxiety on that day. 

(jp) The faces of the fortunate ones that day will be bright. @ Laughing in happiness due to what Allah has prepared for 
them out of His mercy. @ And the faces of the wretched people will have dust on them on that day. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Allah’s reprimand of His Prophet in regard to ‘Abdullah ibn Umm Maktum proves that the Qur’an is from Allah. 2. 
One should pay attention to the ones seeking knowledge and guidance. 3. The horrors of the Day of Judgement are se¬ 
vere, such that man will only be concerned about himself; even the Prophets will be saying: “I worry about myself only, 
I worry about myself only!” 



Abasa 





















J V 

sut^ > h 




©An 


6)-53\i>3J 






fgP 


w. 


mm 




>J0^0£ l^Jlli%0c£^ 
\S1J 0 ^ 0 

c/^Jy \ \ ik$0 cJcS 3 c$\j 0 oiji^5\ 

^ ^ Jfr^^ 'Z~' 4 

^Iz* i£i •^£z%& iS$.^^^S'^j^D tSj$. Ai|. 




@ Darkness will come over them. @ Those de¬ 
scribed above in that state will be the ones who 
combined disbelief and transgression. 

The Folding Up (Surah Al-Takwir) 

® Themes of the Surah: 

It focusses on portraying the day of judgment by 
the disintegration of the universe after its regula¬ 
tion, to show the truth of the Qur’an and to impose 
the path of the Merciful. 

® Explanation: 

dp When the mass of the sun is gathered and its 
light vanishes. 

dp When the stars fall one after the other and their 
light is taken away. 

dp When the mountains are moved from their plac¬ 
es. 

dp When pregnant she-camels, which were their 
most valuable wealth, are neglected by being aban¬ 
doned by their owners. 

(p When wild animals are gathered with human 
beings on one plain. 

Cp When the seas are lit until they become a fire. 

<P When souls are joined with their likeness. A sin¬ 
ner will be joined with a sinner and a pious person 
will be joined with a pious person. 

CP When the girl buried alive is asked by Allah. 

@ For what crime were you killed by the person 
who killed you? 

dp When the servants’ books of deeds are spread 
open, so that each person can read his book of 
deeds. 

@ When the sky is stripped like how the skin is stripped away from a sheep. 

Cp When the Fire is lit. 

Cp When Paradise is brought near to those who are Mindful. 

Cp When that occurs, every soul will know what actions it sent forward for that day. 

Cp) Allah took an oath by the stars that are hidden until they emerge at night. 

Cp That run in their orbits and disappear when dawn rises, like a gazelle that goes into its den i.e. its home. 

Cp He took an oath by the first part of the night when it approaches, and the last part when it recedes. 

Cp He took an oath by the morning when its light emerges. 

dp The Qur’an that is revealed to Muhammad (peace be upon him) is Allah’s speech that was conveyed by a trusted 
angel, Gabriel (peace be upon him), whom Allah entrusted it to. 

dp One who possess strength and great rank in the sight of the Lord of the Throne, may He be glorified, 
dp He is obeyed by the inhabitants of the heavens and trusted in the revelation that he conveys. 

dp Muhammad (peace be upon him), who is in your company and whose intellect, trustworthiness and truthfulness you 
know, is not insane as you slanderously claim. 

Cp Your companion had seen Gabriel in the form that he was created in the clear horizon of the sky. 

dp Your companion is not miserly with you by not conveying what he was instructed to convey to you, nor does he take 

any reward like how fortune-tellers take. 

dp This Qur’an is not the speech of a satan distanced from Allah’s mercy. 

jp So which path will you tread to deny that it is from Allah after all these evidence?! dp The Qur’an is only a reminder 
and counsel to the jinn and mankind, dp For those of you who wish to be steadfast on the path of truth, dp You can only 
will to remain steadfast or do anything else if Allah, the Lord of all created things, wills that. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. A person will be gathered with those who resemble him in good or evil. 2. Burying daughters alive is a great sin about 
which Allah will question the perpetrator on the day of judgment. 3. The servant’s will is subservient to Allah’s will. 


its 61 

3 


Al-Takwir 























The Cleaving (Surah Al-Infltar) 




OAV 




smm 


M4r» 







He 


® Themes of the Surah: 

It focusses on portraying the day of judgment by 
the scattering of arranged creations and a change in 
their condition and course, as a confirmation of the 
previous Surah. 

® Explanation: 

<@ When the sky will split apart because of the an¬ 
gels descending from it. 

(0) When the stars fall one after the other and are 
scattered. 

@ When the seas are opened into one another and 
they merge. 

dj) When the soil of graves is turned over to resur¬ 
rect the dead in them. 

@ At that time, every soul will know the actions it 
sent forward and those it left behind and did not do. 
C|S) O man who has rejected his Lord! What has 
made you go against the instruction of your Lord 
when He gave you respite and did not punish you 
quickly, as a favour from Him?! 

@ The One Who gave you existence after you were 
non-existent, and Who proportioned and balanced 
your limbs. 

d In whatever form He wished to create you, He 
created you. He favoured you as He did not create 
you in the form of a donkey, monkey, dog or other 
form. 

d O y° u w ho are deceived, the matter is not as you 
thought! In fact, you deny the day of recompense 
and do not work for it. 

d Over you are angels who record your deeds. 

Noble in Allah’s sight, scribes who write down your deeds. 

know of every action you do and they write it down. 

Those who do abundant acts of good and obedience will be in everlasting bliss on the day of judgment. 

Those who committed iniquity will be in a fire that will be burned over them. 

They will enter it on the day of recompense and suffer from its heat. 

They will never be absent from it. Instead they will remain in it forever. 

O Messenger! What will tell you what the day of justice is? 

Again, what will tell you what the day of justice is? 

A day when no one will be able to benefit anyone. The entire matter on that day will belong to Allah alone, to deal as 
wishes, and not to anyone besides Him. 


* Julip 0 '^0 O/53 

51*0. 

d£jJ\ (^) ^ 




Al-Infitar 


The Fraudsters (Surah Al-Mutaffifin) 

® Themes of the Surah: 

It focusses on showing the condition of people in respect of their measurements and their homes in the Hereafter, in order 
to warn those who give short measure and deny, and to comfort those believers who are down-trodden. 

® Explanation: 

0) Destruction and loss be for those who give short measure. 

dJ) They are the ones who, when they measure for themselves from others, they take their full right without any reduction, 
dj) But when they measure or weigh for people they reduce the measurement and weight. This was the practice of the 
people of Madinah at the time the Prophet (peace be on him) migrated to them, 
dj) Do these people who do this evil act not know that they will resurrected before Allah?! 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Arrogance is an obstacle to following the truth. 2. The angels record the deeds of the servants by Allah’s order. 

3. The ability of the Creator to create man in any form He wishes. 



































O 

> 

> 




oI^Uji (") f* ?jh \ o vj^q/ yji \ (^) ^v\j 

J \i ^^ 3^5 ^ 


L^o^> 


• \.'9<\ 


St 




@ For the reckoning and recompense on a day that 
is great because of the trials and horrors it contains. 

<J} The day when people will stand before the Lord 
of all creation, for the reckoning. 

@ The matter is not as you thought - that there is 
no resurrection after death. The book of the people 
of iniquity from amongst the disbelievers and hyp¬ 
ocrites will be in loss in the lower earth. 

|jj) O Messenger! What will tell you what Sijjin is?! 

@ Their book is written and will not vanish. Nor 
will there be any increase or decrease in it. 

@ Destruction and loss on that day will be for 
those who deny. 

dP Those who deny the day of recompense in 
which Allah will give His servants the recompense 
of the actions they did in the world. 

@ None denies that day except every person who 
transgresses Allah’s limits and commits abundant 
sins. 

dp When My verses revealed to My messenger are 
recited to him, he says: These are stories of the ear¬ 
lier nations and are not from Allah. 

@ The matter is not as these deniers thought. In¬ 
stead, the sins they used to commit has dominated 
and covered their minds and they therefore have not 
seen the truth with their hearts. 

@ Indeed, they will be prevented from seeing their 
Lord on the day of judgment. 

@ Then they will enter the Fire, to suffer from its 
heat. 

(jp Then on the Day of Judgement it will be said to 
them in rebuke and censure: This punishment that 
you received is what you used to deny in the world 
when your messenger told you about it. 

(jp The matter is not as you thought - that there will be no reckoning or recompense. The book of the people of obedience 
will be in Illiyyun. 

jjp O Messenger! What will tell you what Illiyyun is?! 

|p Their book is written and will not vanish. Nor will there be any increase or decrease in it. 

@ This book is witnessed by the angels brought near in every heaven. 

§j Those who do an abundance of good deeds will be in everlasting bliss on the day of judgment. 

CJ) On decorated couches looking at their Lord, and at everything delightful and pleasing to their souls. 
dP If you see them, you will see in their faces the effect of luxury; in their beauty and splendour. 

5 Their servants will give them wine from sealed containers to drink. 

@ It will give off the fragrance of musk until its very end. For this noble reward the competitors must compete, by doing 
what pleases Allah and leaving what angers Him. 

(jp This sealed drink will be mixed from the spring of Tasnim. 

(jp This is a spring in the highest part of Paradise, from which those brought near will drink purely and the rest of the 
believers will drink from it mixed with other drinks. 

5 Those who committed wrong by the disbelief they held used to mockingly laugh at those who had faith. 

{|P When they passed by the believers they would wink at one another in ridicule and amusement. 

(j|P When they returned to their families they would go back happy with their acts of disbelief and ridicule of the believers, 
dp When they saw the Muslims, they would say: These people are astray from the path of truth, as they abandoned the 
religion of their forefathers. 

dP Allah did not appoint them to guard their deeds so that they could make this statement of theirs. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The danger of sins for the heart. 2. The disbelievers will be deprived of seeing their Lord on the day of judgment. 

3. Mocking the people of religion is a trait of the disbelievers. 


^.^60 

p ($) ijj Sip-5 

pul \ C)\0 ($) 

0 ^2 /* ($) \c pOM 

0 Lpd 51 





















I \ c3j> Jy 0 oj^yi^l3^ ^ 


1 o ji Jffil \ \ ^ 0i*j^q WC) j>jq 0<. ~JL^\ iLji^ \ j>\ 



a 


j jL*? 


c- «- *5 < 

'\Sta 0p£^. oV^ $l3>4 c^ o ' 1 o^^i 

V/^yJ\ Jj0t^ij^S[ j 

0^-ij o\ Joo ^JkJ-JX^ 0 


Al-Inshiqaq 


(jp On the Day of Judgment, those who have faith 
in Allah will laugh at the disbelievers just as the 
disbelievers used to laugh at them in the world. 
@ On decorated couches they will look at the ever¬ 
lasting bliss that Allah prepared for them. 

@ The disbelievers have been given the humiliat¬ 
ing punishment as recompense of the actions they 
did in the world. 

The Splitting (Surah Al-Inshiqaq) 

® Themes of the Surah: 

It focusses on portraying the day of judgment by 
the universe’s surrender and submission to the 
command of its Lord, to impose surrender and to 
condemn denial. 

Explanation: 

CfJ) When the sky ruptures because of the angels de¬ 
scending from it. 

(j$) And listens submissively to its Lord, as it rightly 
should. 

(jj) When the earth is stretched by Allah as leather 
is stretched. 

(Jp And throws out the treasures and the dead in it 
and becomes rid of them. 

jJS) And listens submissively to its Lord, as it rightly 
should. 

© O man, you are either doing good or evil and 
you will meet it on the Day of Judgment, so that 
Allah can give you the recompense for that. 

@ Since Allah mentioned man’s action in brief, he 
details the condition of those who did action on the 
day of judgment by saying: As for him who is given 


his book of deeds in his right hand. 

jjS) He will have an easy reckoning by Allah and his actions will be presented to Him without his being taken to task. 

(Jp And he will return to his family delighted. 

@ As for him who is given his book in his left hand behind his back. 

Jg He will call out for destruction to himself. 

(Sj) And he will enter the fire of Hell to suffer from its heat. 

if In the world he was amongst his family rejoicing with his acts of disbelief and sins. 

@ He thought that he will not come back to life after death. 

{j) Indeed, Allah will bring him back to life just as He created him the first time. His Lord was watchful of his condition. 
Nothing of that was hidden from Him and He will give him the recompense for his actions. 

@) Allah took an oath by the redness that is in the horizon after the sun sets. 

Cjj) And He took an oath by the night and what is gathered therein. 

(@> And the moon when it comes together and is complete becoming a full moon. 

(j|S) You, O man, will mount one state after another from a drop, then a clot, then a piece of flesh, then life, then death and 
then resurrection. 

f|p What is the matter with these disbelievers who do not have faith in Allah and the last day?! 
fj) When the Qur’an is recited to them, they do not prostrate to their Lord?! 

{J} In fact, those who disbelieve reject what their messengers brought to them. 

jjp Allah knows well what is contained in their hearts. Nothing of their actions is hidden from Him. 

@ Tell them, O Messenger, about a painful punishment that awaits them. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The sky and the earth are subjugated to their Lord. 

2. Every person is striving either for good or evil. 

3. The sign of fortune on the day of judgment is receiving one’s book in the right hand. The sign of misfortune is receiving 
it in the left hand. 






























5 7^\clj\ jc-l-aJli^ 


>3 * 1 


S/- 


^ T 


(jp Except those who have faith in Allah and do 
good deeds, for them is a reward that will never 
terminate: Paradise. 

The Constellations (Surah Al-Buruj) 

® Themes of the Surah: 

It focusses on displaying Allah’s power, His com¬ 
prehensive knowledge, and His warning of a severe 
punishment for those who prey on the believers. 

® Explanation: 

jj5 Allah took an oath by the sky that contains the 
phases of the sun, moon etc. 
jj} He took an oath by the day of judgment in which 
He promised to gather all creation. 

@ He took an oath by every witness, like the 
prophet who is a witness over his nation, and every 
thing witnessed, like the nation that is a witness 
over its prophet. 

@ Those who made a huge crevice in the ground 
are cursed. 

@ In which they lit a fire and threw the believers 
into it alive. 

C§| While they sat around that crevice filled with 
fire. 

(0 They were witnesses to the torture and ill-treat¬ 
ment they meted out to the believers, as they were 
present there. 

Cp These disbelievers found no fault in the believ¬ 
ers except that they had faith in Allah, the Mighty, 

Whom none can overpower, the One Praised in 
everything. 

@ The One to Whom alone belongs control of the 
heavens and control of the earth. He is aware of everything. No affair of His servants is hidden from Him. 

@ Those who tortured the believing men and women with the fire in order to turn them away from having faith in Allah 
alone, and then did not repent to Allah from their sins, for them on the day of judgment is the punishment of Hell and for 
them is the punishment of the Fire that will burn them, as a recompense for their burning the believers in the fire. 

@ Those who have faith in Allah and do good deeds, for them will be gardens under whose palaces and trees rivers flow. 
That reward, which is prepared for them, is the supreme success that no other success comes close to. 
if The seizure of your Lord, O Messenger, of the wrongdoer - even if He gives his respite for a while - is forceful. 

@ He begins the creation and the punishment and repeats them. 

fjp He is Forgiving of the sins of His servants who repent and He loves His allies who are Mindful. 

Possessor of the Noble Throne. 

@ Doer of the what He wills such as pardoning the sins of whoever He wills and punishing whoever He wills. There is 
none that can compel Him, may He be glorified. 

@ Has the news of the forces who enlisted to combat and be an obstacle to the truth reached you, O Messenger?! 

C§| Pharaoh, and the Thamud, the people of Salih (peace be upon him). 

The obstacle to the faith of these people is not that the incidents of the destruction of the nations who denied did not 
come to them. Instead, they deny what their messengers brought to them due to following desires. 

Allah surrounds and keeps a record of their actions. Nothing of that misses him and He will give them the recompense 
for the same. 

@ The Qur’an is neither poetry nor rhyme as the deniers claim. Instead, it is a noble Qur’an. 

In a tablet that is protected against alteration and distortion, and decrease and increase. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. A believer is tested in proportion to his faith. 

2. Giving preference to the safety of one’s faith over the safety of one’s body is a sign of salvation on the day of judgment. 

3. Repentance with its requirements wipes out what is before it. 



51.0 f 

610 

^ <sjr& 

0 0 jJS 5 

0^>jL^k ^ 4 0 XJl 























The Morning Star (Surah Al-Tariq) 


(jLAJalisjyL *| 0 ^ ^ 


C>y'3&\&& 




oS]B \ \ (^) CbJ^ \ t* (iijj \aj (^) ^Lz}\j 

c^^lj^ cJ5 05(3^ 

^r>jl ^IjX& cfc^ ^ ^ 

/a^ 0 £U^o\S o$fo& 0^'o\S £^J0 
0 \ J}2 


® Themes of the Surah: 

It focusses on showing Allah’s penetrating control 
and effective power. 

{*> Explanation: 

© Allah took an oath by the sky and He took an 
oath by the star that knocks at night. © O Messen¬ 
ger! What will tell you the status of this great star?! 
© It is the star that pierces the sky with its glowing 
light. © There is no soul except that Allah has as¬ 
signed to it an angel to record its deeds for the reck¬ 
oning on the day of judgment. © So let man reflect 
over what Allah created him from, so that Allah’s 
power and man’s inability becomes clear to him. 
© Allah created him from a spurting liquid that is 
split into the womb. © This liquid emerges from 
between the spinal column of a man and the bones 
of the chest. © He, may He be glorified - since He 
created him from that despised liquid - has the pow¬ 
er to bring him back to life after death for the reck¬ 
oning and recompense. © On the day when secrets 
will be tried and the intentions, beliefs etc. that the 
hearts conceal will be exposed, and the righteous 
will be distinguished from the corrupt. © On that 
day man will not have any power to protect himself 
from Allah’s punishment, nor any helper to assist 
him. © Allah took an oath by the sky that con¬ 
tains rain, because it comes down from its direction 
time after time. © He took an oath by the earth that 
cracks open to reveal the plants, fruit and trees in 

__ L __ _ Jf . __it. © This Qur’an that is revealed to Muhammad 

Al-Tanq - Al-AMa __ Part 30 _(peace be upon him) is a word that separates truth 

from falsehood, and fact from lie. © It is not a game and falsehood, but it is serious and the truth. © Those who deny 
what their messenger brought to them plot and scheme to reject and refute his call. © I too plot and scheme to make the 
religion victorious and to disprove falsehood. © So give respite, O Messenger, to these disbelievers. Give them respite 
for a short while, and do not seek to hasten their punishment and destruction. 






1 


The Highest (Surah Al-A‘la) 

® Themes of the Surah: 

It focusses on reminding individuals of Allah’s favour, linking them to the Hereafter and releasing them from worldly 
obsessions. 

® Explanation: 

© Declare the transcendence of your Lord Who is High above His creation, by uttering His Name when you remember 
and revere Him. © The One Who created man in due proportion and balanced his stature. © The One Who determined 
for all created things their species, types and attributes and Who guided every creation to what is appropriate and suitable 
for it. © The One Who brought out from the earth what your animals graze on. © The He made it into dry blackish 
straw after it had been green and fresh. © I will teach you, O Messenger, the Qur’an, and gather it in your chest so you 
do not forget it. So do not race with Gabriel in the recitation as you used to do with the desire that you do not forget it. 
© Except for what Allah wishes you to forget for some reason. He (may He be glorified) knows what is made public 
and what is hidden. Nothing of that is hidden from Him. © I will make it easy for you to do actions that please Allah 
and enter you into Paradise. © So give counsel to people with the Qur’an that I reveal to you and remind them as long 
as the reminder is heard. © The one who fears Allah will pay heed to your counsel, because he is the one who benefits 
from counsel. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The angels preserve man and his actions, whether good or bad, so that he is taken to account for them. 2. The weakness 
of the plot of the disbelievers when compared to Allah’s plan, may He be glorified. 3. Fear of Allah is a reason for taking 
heed and admonishment. 


























@ The disbeliever will keep away and alienate 
himself from the counsel, because he is the most 
wretched person in the afterlife as he will enter the 
Fire. @ The one who will enter the great Fire of 
the afterlife to suffer and bear its heat forever. @ 
Then he will remain forever in the Fire without dy¬ 
ing therein and being relieved of the punishment he 
suffers from, and without living a good and decent 
life. The one who purified himself from idola¬ 
try and sins has attained the objective. @ Who re¬ 
membered his Lord by the various forms of remem¬ 
brance that He ordained. Who discharged the prayer 
in the required manner. (SjJ) But, you give preference 
to the worldly life and prefer it over the afterlife 
despite the huge disparity between them, (jp The 
Hereafter is indeed, better and superior to the world 
and the enjoyments and pleasures it contains, and 
it is more lasting, because the bliss it contains does 
not ever end. @ These instructions and stories that 
I mentioned to you are in the scriptures revealed 
before you. These are the scriptures revealed to 
Abraham and Moses (peace be upon them). 

The Overwhelming Event (Surah Al-Ghashiya) 


l > 
I 






^ J> ✓ ^ 



%&02 


t&J 


0** ^ X 0^ *** S' *** 

(^) W? 

^ )\ 9 '' A. ' 0^J >' > * , <* . ^ > } . ) -j 


4^0^ 





Ul 





Themes of the Surah: 

It focusses on reminding people of the spectacles 
of divine power in respect of punishment and bliss, 
and the indications of these in the present signs, so 
that people can be filled with desire and dread. 

® Explanation: 

(Sj) Has the news of the day of judgment that will 
overwhelm people with its horrors come to you, O 

Messenger?! CjJ) People on the day of judgment will either be wretched or fortunate. The faces of the wretched will be 
humiliated and downcast. (JfJ) Tired and strained due to the chains that they will be dragged by and the shackles that they 
will be tied with, (jj} Those faces will enter a hot fire to suffer from its heat. @ They will be given to drink from a spring 
with extremely hot water. @ They will not have any food to nourish them besides the worst and most rotten type of food 
from a plant that is called shibriq, which becomes poisonous when it becomes dry. It does not nourish the one who 
eats it nor does it satiate his hunger. (^J) The faces of the fortunate on that day will display luxury, delight and happiness, 
because of the bliss they received. (0) Pleased with the righteous actions they did in the world, as they had found the 
reward of their actions stored up and multiplied. @ In a Paradise elevated in position and rank. @ In Paradise they will 
not hear any word of falsehood and futility, let alone hearing any prohibited word. @ In this Paradise there are flowing 
springs that they will make flow and direct however they wish. @ In it are high couches. And cups laid out and ready 
for drinking. @ In it are cushions packed closely to one another. @ In it are carpets spread out here and there. @ After 
Allah mentioned the disparity between the states of the wretched and the fortunate in the afterlife, He directed the sight of 
the disbelievers to what will show them the power of the Creator and the beauty of His creation, so that they can use this 
as evidence for faith in order to enter Paradise and become of the fortunate, by saying: Do they not look with reflection at 
the camels, how Allah created them and subjugated them to human beings?! @ And at the sky, how He raised it so that 
it became a protected ceiling above them, that does not fall on them?! (j§) And at the mountains, how He erected them 
and used them to make the earth stable so that it does not shake with the people?! @ And at the earth, how He spread it 
out, and made it suitable for people to settle on?! @ After He directed them to look at those things that show His Power, 
He directed His messenger, saying: So counsel, O Messenger, these people and warn them of Allah’s punishment. You 
are but one who reminds. You are only required to remind them. Guiding them to faith is in Allah’s hands alone. @ You 
have not been given control over them so that you can compel them to have faith. 

® Beneficial Points: 1. The importance of purifying the soul from outward and inward filth. 2. Inference from created 
things about the existence of the Creator and His greatness. 3. The task of the caller is to invite, not to make people 
follow guidance, because guidance is in Allah’s Hand. 





























1 

1 


j 0J^==^ '< C>\Xj& kj 'SjLz 

§s%\ 0 &x$£\h 


Igr^ 


* *> 0 \\ J ts'C t A 


0i\^Sjj >LS <^> ii<J* 

^^ y* y* ^ ^ C S C S ^ ,0 *> *£ 

0 y> f£ ^ **/0 

\ (£) jlSj^ \ c5i 0 Ir^c^ 

^ \ jIL^M 

*zX£\ U \S\ ^ IS 1$ 0 \ J <2^5 o!0 

“ST^ ^ ^ $ 

o^l^=b^ (^) i y^uZu^ \ ^Ixl (^) 'L->xj \ 

5^\£V^( 

(^li^dL^ <Jsd^cJo 


Al-Fajr 


593 


(j§) But, those of them who turn away from faith and 
reject Allah and His messenger. 

{§} Allah will punish them on the Day of Judgement 
with the greatest punishment by entering them into 
Hell to remain there forever. 

C8) To Me alone is their return after their death. 

(jP Then it is My duty alone to call them to account 
for their actions. This is not for you or anyone be¬ 
sides you. 

The Dawn (Surah Al-Fajr) 

® Themes of the Surah: 

Emphasis on presenting the manifestations of di¬ 
vine greatness and power in the universe, the con¬ 
ditions of people, and mentioning the outcome of 
the deviants. 

® Explanation: 

CjJS) Allah may He be glorified takes an oath on the 
dawn. 

{$} And He takes an oath on the first ten nights of 
Dhul-Hijjah. 

© He also takes an oath on the odd and even of 
things. 

(^J) And He takes an oath on the night when it ar¬ 
rives, continues and goes away. The complement 
of these oaths is: you will definitely be requited for 
your actions. 

CfJ) In any of the aforementioned, is there any oath 
that benefits the intelligent one? 

@ O Messenger! Do you not see what your Lord 
did with the ‘Ad i.e. the people of Hud, when they 
rejected their Messenger? 


QJ The tribe of ‘Ad that traced to its forefather, the tall Irani. 

{j) The likes of which Allah never created in the cities. 

(Jj) And do you not see what your Lord did with the Thamud i.e. the tribe of Saleh, who would carve the stones of the 
mountains, making houses out of them. @) And do you not see what your Lord did to Pharaoh, who had pegs with which 
he punished the people? @ All these people transgressed the limit in tyranny and oppression; each of them transgressed 
it in his land. @ They caused an abundance of corruption due to spreading disbelief and sins. @ So Allah made them 
suffer His severe punishment, and annihilated them off the earth. O Messenger! Indeed, your Lord watches over and 
observes the actions of the people, so that He can requite whoever does good with Paradise, and whoever does evil with 
the hellfire. @ Because the nations Allah destroyed were blessed with power and strength, Allah explains that blessing 
them with such is not proof of His being pleased with them. He says: As for the human, it is in his nature that when he 
is tested by his Lord and He favours him by blessing him with wealth, honour and offspring, he thinks that it is because 
of his nobility in the eyes of Allah. He says: “My Lord has favoured me because of me being worthy of being favoured.” 
@ And as for when He tests him by restricting his sustenance, he thinks it is because of his insignificance in the eyes of 
his Lord. So he says: “My Lord has disgraced me.” @ Never! It is not as this human thinks, that favouring is proof of 
Allah being pleased with His servant, and that misfortune is proof of the servant’s insignificance in the eyes of his Lord. 
Rather, the reality is that you do not show generosity towards the orphan from the sustenance Allah has provided you 
with. (0 Neither do any of you encourage the other in feeding the poor person who cannot find anything to consume. 
@ You relentlessly devour the rights of the weak, i.e. the women and orphans, without consideration for its permissibility. 
@ And you intensely love wealth, being miserly in spending it in the path of Allah, due to your greed of it. @ These 
actions are not befitting of you. Remember when the earth will be moved vigorously and shaken. @ And your Lord will 
come, O Messenger, to pass judgement between His servants, and the angels will also come arranged in rows. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The first ten nights of Dhul-Hijjah enjoy a virtue over the rest of the days of the year. 2. The affirmation of the coming 
of Allah on the Day of Judgement as befits His majesty, without anthropomorphizing, likening or descriptively desig¬ 
nating. 
































$■&&& \ 


0%&%& &6&\]j00 





@ And on that day, hell will be brought with it hav¬ 
ing seventy thousand reins, each rein being pulled 
by seventy thousand angels. On that day, the hu¬ 
man will remember his shortcomings in the rights 
of Allah, but that remembrance on that day will not 
benefit him in the slightest, because it will be a Day 
of Requital, not action! 

(jjj) He will say out of intense regret: “If only I had 
sent forth good deeds for my life Hereafter, which 
is the real life.” 

<§} On that day no one will penalise like the penal 
ising of Allah, because the penalising of Allah 
most severe and lasting. 

{§} Neither will anyone bind in chains like His 
binding of the disbelievers in chains. 

@ After Allah mentioned the requital of the disbe¬ 
lievers, He mentions the requital of the believers. 

He says: As for the soul of the believer, it will be 
told at the time of death and on the Day of Judge¬ 
ment: “O the soul contented with faith and good 
deeds!” 

“Return to your Lord, pleased with Him because 
of the abundant reward you will receive, and with 
Him may He be glorified being pleased with you 
because of your good deeds.” 
d§§) “Now enter along with My pious servants.” 

@ “And enter with them into My Paradise, which I 
have prepared for them.” 

The City (Surah Al-Balad) 

® Themes of the Surah: 

Emphasis on the human: between the effect of dis¬ 
belief and punishment, and between the ascending on the steps of mercy and faith in both worlds. 

® Explanation: 

d}) Allah takes an oath on the sacred city i.e. Makkah Al-Mukarramah 

@ O Messenger! It is permissible for you to do whatever you wish on the Day of the Conquest of Makkah, from capital 
punishment to those whom are deserving of it, to taking captive whomsoever deserves it. 

Cf3> And Allah takes an oath on the father of humanity, also taking an oath on the offspring reproduced from him. 

@ Verily, I have created the human in tiredness and difficulty, because of the severities he experiences in the world. 

Does the human think that when he sins, no one is in a position to be able to do anything to him, nor take retribution 
from him, even if it is his Lord who created him? 

CfJ) He says: “I spent a lot of wealth, heaped up.” 

Cp Does this person boastful over the wealth he has spent think that Allah does not see him? And that He will not take 

him to account over his wealth: how he earned it and where he spent it? 

dj) Did I not create eyes for him with which he can see? 

djj) And a tongue and lips with which he can speak? 

dj) And I made the paths of goodness and evils known to him. 

He will be required to cross the valley that separates him from Paradise, which he will cross, djj) O Messenger! Do you 
know what the valley is that he has to cross, in order to enter Paradise? @ It is to free a male or female slave. 
d|p Or to feed on a day of drought, in which food is scarce. @ A child who has lost his father, whom he is related to. 

@ Or a poor person who has no possessions. @ Then he is required to be from those who have faith in Allah and advise 
each other to remain steadfast on act of obedience and refraining from sins, and bearing patience over difficulties, togeth¬ 
er with advising one another to show mercy to the servants of Allah, 
dj) Those are the people of the right. 

Beneficial Points: 

Freeing slaves, feeding the needy at times of difficulty, bringing faith in Allah and encouraging one another to be merciful 
and patient are all means of entering Paradise. 


'SI ^ 


Al-Balad 


594 



























Lj^^>c3 \^s^) Is c£) \^y^ \jaj \j^3 

3 (jy* 35^ (^) \^gi^3 Cy® 

| J ^) J\S <S^\ c ^'^0 


* A 


@ As for those who disbelieve in My verses that 
were revealed to My Messenger, they are the peo¬ 
ple of the left, © A closed fire will be set upon 
them on the Day of Judgement, with which they 
will be punished. 

The Sun (Surah Al-Shams) 

® Themes of the Surah: 

Emphasis on the manifestation of the signs of Allah 
and His blessings in the land, people and their cir¬ 
cumstances, in order to purify their souls and warn 
them from disobedience. 

® Explanation: 

© Allah takes an oath on the sun and its rising after 
breaking onto the eastern horizon. © He also takes 
an oath on the moon when it follows the sun after 
it has set. © Allah also takes an oath on the day 
when it reveals whatever is on the face of the earth 
through its light. © And He also takes an oath on 
the night when it covers the face of the earth, dark¬ 
ening it. © And He takes an oath on the sky, taking 
an oath on its perfect creation. © He also takes an 
oath on the earth: the way it has been spread so that 
people can live on it. © He also takes an oath on 
each soul, with Allah having created it equally. 

© Then He made it understand - without teaching 
it - what was evil so it could be abstained from, and 
what was good so it could be implemented. © Ver¬ 
ily, the one who has purified his soul by adorning 
it with virtuous characteristics and freeing it from 
evil traits, has succeeded. © And verily the one 
who has secretly thrust his soul into sins and diso¬ 
bedience, has lost. © After Allah mentions the loss 
of the one who thrust his soul secretly into sins, He 
mentions the Thamud as an example of that, saying: The Thamud rejected their Prophet Saleh due to their transgressing 
the limits in committing sins and disobedience. © When the most wretched among them stood up after his people has 
appointed him for the task. © The Messenger of Allah Saleh (peace be upon him) said to them: “Leave the camel of Allah 
alone; let it drink on its day and do not pursue it intending evil.” © But they rejected their Messenger with regards to the 
camel, and so the most wretched among them killed it with the consent of his people. Therefore, they were all guilty of 
the crime and so Allah enveloped them into His punishment and destroyed them by a shriek due to their sins. He made 
them equal in the punishment that He destroyed them with. © Allah set the punishment that destroyed them, upon them, 
without Him, may He be glorified, fearing any reproach over His actions. 





9 9 


Al-Shams - Al-Layl 595 


Part 30 


The Night (Surah Al-Layl) 

® Themes of the Surah: 

Emphasis on mentioning the difference between the verses, the souls and their deeds, to make the difference in virtue 
clear between the believers and the disbelievers. 

® Explanation: 

(ft Allah takes an oath on the night when it covers whatever is between the heavens and the earth with its darkness. 

© And Allah takes an oath on the day when it becomes clear and visible. © And He takes an oath on His creating the two 
genders: The male and female. © O people! Your actions are different: some are good, which are the causes of entering 
Paradise, while others are evil, which are the causes of entering the hellfire. © As for the one who gives whatever is 
necessary for him to spend, i.e. Zakat, financial support and repatriation, and is mindful of that which Allah has prohibited 
him from. © And he believes in the substitute Allah has promised him. © I shall soon make performing good deeds and 
spending in My path easy for him. © And as for the one who is miserly with his wealth and does not spend it in the ave¬ 
nues necessary for him to spend in, thinking himself to be in no need of Allah and not asking Allah for any of His grace. 
© Whilst rejecting the substitute and reward Allah has promised him if he spends his wealth in His path. 

® Beneficial Points: 1. It is important to purify and nurture the soul in doing good. 2. Those who help each other in sin, 
are all equally guilty of it. 3. Sins are the means of being punished in this world. 


























Mil 




4^-x), V. oXJ>J^l\^J (^) I^Yj f 4^\j0 (AV t C j \ (ffi) ' 

($) 45 ^5 fe? Sf L0%3^ 




llrfW 


i&mixe 


r SX§g | 


0 <j? ^5 <itp t^co^U 0 \i\ J^liO 1 

dijj .XLLao 0 l!/^ o^ 


© I will soon make performing evil deeds easy for 
him, and make difficult doing good. 

© His wealth that he is miserly with will not ben¬ 
efit him at all when he dies and enters the hellfire. 

© Indeed, it is My responsibility to make the path 
of truth clear from the path of falsehood. 

© And indeed, the afterlife and the worldly life be¬ 
longs to Me; I do whatever I want with it. That is 
not the case with anyone else. 

© So O people! If you disobey Me, I warn you of 
the hellfire which is being kindled. 

© None will suffer the heat of this fire except the 
most wretched, i.e. the disbeliever. 

© The one who rejected whatever the Messenger 
(peace be upon him) brought, and turned away 
from fulfilling the command of Allah. 

© The most Allah-conscious of the people will be 
distanced from it, i.e. Abu Bakr. 

© The one who spends his wealth in righteous av¬ 
enues, to purify himself of sins. 

© He does not spend whatever wealth he spends, 
to repay any favour done to him by anyone. 

© Through his spending, he only intends the pleas¬ 
ure of his Lord who is High above His creation. 

© And indeed, soon, he will be pleased with the 
generous reward Allah will grant him. 

The Forenoon (Surah Al-Duha) 

® Themes of the Surah: 

Emphasis on Allah continuously taking care of His 
Prophet (peace be upon him) and His favouring him 
with revelation, to put him at ease as well as re¬ 
minding the believers to be grateful. 

® Explanation: 

© Allah takes an oath on the beginning of the day. 

© And He takes an oath on the night when it darkens and people cease to move in it. 

© O Messenger! Your Lord has not left you, nor has he begun to hate you, as the idolaters claimed when there was a 
break in the revelation. 

d iIndeed, the abode of the afterlife is better for you than the worldly one, because of the everlasting bounties that it has. 
© Very soon He will grant you an abundant reward, and your nation also, until you become content with what He has 
granted you and your nation. © Verily, He found you at a time when you were a child whose father had passed away, and 
so He made a place of refuge for you by causing your grandfather Abdul Muttalib to become fond of you, and then your 
uncle Abu Talib. © He found you in a state where you did not know what revelation or faith was, and so He taught you 
about that which you did not know. © And He found you poor, so He made you self-sufficient. © Therefore, do not treat 
badly the one who has lost his father in childhood, nor look down upon him. © And do not rebuke the needy beggar. © 
And be grateful for the favours of Allah upon you, and talk about them. 





0 


Al-Duha - Al-Sharh 


The Opening Forth (Surah Al-Sharh) 


® Themes of the Surah: 

Emphasis on the completion of the favours of Allah upon His Prophet (peace be upon him), by removing grief, anxiety 
and difficulty from him, and what that necessitates. 

® Explanation: 

© Verily, Allah has opened up your heart for you and made receiving revelation beloved to you. © And I have removed 
sin from you. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The status of the Prophet (peace be upon him) according to his Lord is unparalleled. 2. Being grateful for the favours 
of Allah is a right of His over His servants. 3. It is obligatory to show mercy to the weak, and show kindness to them. 































go *W 


1 0J& 3g$&0 CZ& c^^0^4^%4 


* h\Jq2*-*j i l. b . Aj jiji) ^ t-^ 'i 

’XjoSj$0g 


131? 


' t <X'i>W-'C r A 


«g 

sgl 


(0) That which was burdening you to the extent that 
it almost broke your back. 0 And I elevated for 
you your mention, so you are now remembered in 
the call to prayer, and the call preceding the prayer, 
and at other times. 0 Indeed, with difficulty and 
constraint, comes ease and options. 0 Indeed, with 
difficulty and constraint, comes ease and options; 
when you know that well, the troubling of your 
people will not terrify you and will not stop you 
from calling towards Allah. 0 So when you finish 
your work and complete it, strive in the worship of 
your Lord. 0 And divert your passion and resolve 
towards Allah alone. 

The Fig (Surah Al-TIn) 

^ Themes of the Surah: 

Emphasis on the value of the human and his nobil¬ 
ity due to his religion, as opposed to his lowliness 
and disgrace without it. That is why Allah takes an 
oath on the places revelation was revealed. 

Explanation: 

0 Allah takes an oath on the fig and the place it 
grows, and the olive and the place it grows: the 
land of Palestine where Jesus (peace be upon him) 
was sent as a Messenger. @ And He takes an oath 
on Mount Sinai, near where Allah conversed inti¬ 
mately with Moses (peace be upon him). 0 And 
He takes an oath on Makkah, the sacred city which 
gives sanctuary to whoever enters it, and in which 
Muhammad (peace be upon him) was sent as a 
Messenger. 0 Verily, I have created the human in 
the most balanced of ways and the best appearance. 
0 Then I return him to old age and childishness in 
the world, so he cannot benefit fully from his body, 
when he ruins his nature and goes towards the hellfire. 0 Except for those who have faith in Allah and do good deeds, 
because they, despite growing old, will get an everlasting reward i.e. Paradise, because they kept their nature pure. 0 So 
O human! What causes you to reject the Day of Requital, after you have seen the many signs of His power? 0 Is Allah 
not the most just and fair of judges by having appointed the Day of Judgement for requital? Is it comprehendible that 
Allah leaves His servants in vain, without judging between them, by not requiting the doer of good for his good, and the 
evil-doer for his evil? 


\ (^) ^ cai c-j\ (^) 2^—^ ^ ^ 


Al-TIn - Al-‘Alaq 


[j| 597 


The Clot (SOrah Al-‘Alaq) 

® Themes of the Surah: 

Emphasis on mentioning the perfection of the human through knowledge and revelation, which encourages him to attach 
himself to his Lord and submit to Him, as opposed to his deficiency in doing the opposite. 

^Explanation: 

0 O Messenger! Read what Allah reveals to you, starting with the name of your Lord who created the creation. 0 He 
created the human from a clot of congealed blood, after it had been a drop of semen. 0 O Messenger! Read what Allah 
reveals to you. Your Lord is the most Kind; no kind person can come to His kindness, because He has abundant generosity 
and goodness. 0 The one who taught to write, and the revelation, through the pen. @ He taught the human that which 
he did not know. 0 Truly, indeed, the transgressing human i.e. Abu Jahl, has crossed the limit in overstepping the limits 
of Allah. 0 Just because he has seen him showing no need of the prestige and wealth he possesses. 0 O human! Indeed, 
to your Lord is the return on the Day of Judgement, where He will requite each person with what he deserves. 0 Have 
you seen anything more shocking than the matter of Abu Jahl, who prevented. 0 He prevented My servant Muhammad 
(peace be upon him) when he performed prayer near the Ka‘bah. 0 What do you think will happen, if this person who 
has been prevented, is following guidance and foresight from his Lord? 0 Or that he instructs the people to be mindful 
of Allah by fulfilling His commands and refrain from the things he has not allowed; can such a person be prevented? 

® Beneficial Points: 1. The pleasure of Allah is the loftiest of objectives. 2. The importance of reading and writing has 
been emphasised in Islam. 3. Wealth is dangerous if it leads to arrogance and distances one from the truth. 4. Prohibiting 
good is one of the traits of disbelief. 

































@ What do you think will happen if this preventer 
rejected whatever the Messenger brought and turned 
away from it? Does he not fear Allah? 

@ Does the preventer of this servant from prayer 
not know that Allah sees whatever he does, and that 
nothing is hidden from Him? @ It is not as this ig¬ 
norant person imagines; if he does not stop causing 
harm to My servant and rejecting him, I will defi¬ 
nitely seize him and drag him violently by the top of 
his head, towards the hellfire. The owner of that 
forehead is a liar in speech and erroneous in action. 
@ So when he is seized by his forehead towards the 
hellfire, let him call out to his companions and as¬ 
sociates asking for their help to save him from the 
punishment. @ I will call upon the gatekeepers of 
hell: the fierce angels who do not disobey My com¬ 
mand when I command them, and do whatever they 
are commanded to do. It will then be seen which of 
the two parties are stronger and more capable. @ It 
is not as this oppressor thinks: that he can cause any 
harm to you. So do not follow him in command or 
prohibition; rather, prostrate to Allah and draw clos¬ 
er to Him through acts of obedience, because that is 
how you can draw closer to Him. 

The Night of Decree (Surah Al-Qadar) 

Themes of the Surah: 

Emphasis on mentioning the greatness of the Night 
of Decree, its virtue and what was revealed on it. 

® Explanation: 

@ Indeed, I revealed the Qur’an at once to the heav¬ 
en nearest to the world, just as I started off revealing 








i$)t Z 


fS- 







! A' 



1 


■fSBJ S - 1 




Al-Qadar - Al-Bayyinah 


Part 30 


it to Muhammad (peace be upon him), on the Night 

of Decree in the month of Ramadan. @0 Prophet! Do you know what goodness and blessings lie in this night? ( 


m 


D This 


night is a night of great goodness; it is better than a thousand months for the one who stands in prayer during it, whilst having 
faith and hoping for reward. @ The angels and Gabriel (peace be upon him) descend during it with the permission of their 
Lord (may He be glorified), bringing every matter Allah has decreed to happen that year, whether it be sustenance, deaths, 
births or anything else He has decreed. @ This whole blessed night contains goodness, right from its beginning until its 
end, with the breaking of dawn. 


The Clear Evidence (Surah Al-Bayyinah) 


® Themes of the Surah: 

Emphasis on the value of messengership of Muhammad; its clarity and its perfection. 

® Explanation: 

(0) Those who disbelieved, from the Jews, the Christians and the idolaters, are not going to break their consensus and agree¬ 
ment on disbelief, until a clear proof and manifest evidence comes to them. @ This clear proof and manifest evidence is a 
Messenger from Allah whom He has sent, and who recites pure scriptures, only the purest of beings may touch them. @ In 
those scriptures is true information and fair rulings, which guide the people towards that in which lies their righteousness 
and decency. @ The Jews who were given the Torah and the Christians who were given the Gospel, did not disagree except 
after Allah sent His Prophet to them. There were some who became Muslims, and others who persisted in their disbelief 
despite knowing of the truth of their Prophet. @ The criminality and stubbornness of the Jews and the Christians is evident, 
in that they have not been commanded in this Qur’an, except to do those very things they have been commanded to do in 
both their books, i.e. worshipping Allah alone, refraining from ascribing partners to Him, establishing prayer and giving in 
Zakat. So whatever they have been commanded to do, is actually the straight religion in which there is no deviance. 

® Beneficial Points: 1. The Night of Decree enjoys a greater virtue than the rest of the nights of the year. 2. Sincerity in 
worship is one of the conditions of its acceptance. 3. Disbelief is the worst trait found amongst the creation, whereas faith 
in Allah is the purest and loftiest attribute. 4. Fearing Allah is the means of attaining His pleasure. 5. The earth will testify 
against the deeds on the children of Adam. 
































jrijtaAv J] 



_ _ ^ ^ ^ 

J^jiVp*-0^4/^l<^3^ 0^="ei^fl) \ 

<4^2. Q -£ 

0/^5^=-^^ ^)y^)J^CS>^ ^ \ Jo\ I4-S 


3P^ 


the 


(0) Indeed, those who disbelieved - from the Jews, 
the Christians and the idolaters - will enter into 
hell on the Day of Judgement, wherein they shall 
remain forever. They are the worst of the creation 
because of their disbelief in Allah and rejection of 
His Messenger. 

© Indeed, those who have faith in Allah and do 
good deeds, they are the ones who are the best of 
creation. 

© Their reward with their Lord (may He be glo¬ 
rified) is gardens under the trees and palaces of 
which rivers flow, and wherein they shall remain 
forever. Allah is pleased with them because of them 
bringing faith in Him and obeying Him, and they 
are also pleased with Him because of Him giving 
them His mercy. This mercy can be acquired by the 
one who fears his Lord, and so fulfils His command 
and refrains from the thing He has not allowed. 

The Earthquake (Surah Al-Zalzalah) 

® Themes of the Surah: 

Emphasis on awakening the neglectful hearts to 
have conviction in the meticulous accounting of 
Allah. 

® Explanation: 

© When the earth will be shaken vigorously, which 
will happen to it on the Day of Judgement. 

© And the earth will remove everything from 
within itself, i.e. the dead and other things. 

© And the human will say, confused: “What is the 
matter with the earth, that it is moving and shak¬ 
ing?” 

On that great day, the earth will inform regarding the good and evil deeds that were committed upon it. 

Because Allah will have taught it and commanded it to do so. 

On that great day on which the earth will quake, the humans will come to of the place of reckoning in groups, to see 
deeds they committed in the world. 

So whoever did a good or righteous deed equal to the weight of a small ant, will see it in front of him. 

And whoever did an evil deed equal to that, will see that in front of him also. 











Al- 


i-Zalzalah - Al-‘Adiyat ^ 


Those That Run (Surah Al-‘Adiyat) 


® Themes of the Surah: 

Emphasis on mentioning the reality of the human in his concern for worldly affairs, reminding him of his ultimate return, 
and encouraging him to rectify his path. 

® Explanation: 

© Allah takes an oath on the horses that run so hard that their breath can be heard. 

© And He also takes an oath on the horses who, when their shoes strike the stones with force, sparks fly. 

© And He also takes an oath on the horses that raid the enemy at dawn. 

© And unsettle the dust by their running. 

© They then take their riders collectively into the midst of the enemy. 

® Beneficial Points: 

It is in the nature of man to love wealth. 




























ih * 




<2-A> 

9 


(^) )_t* _SM J|\_a rV-3Q \jal jA_ao Nii\ -.'-'( ^ l Jo 

510^ -L-fllklU (J-v^fl? 

i^SJUS^ 







(0 Indeed, the human is hesitant of the goodness 
his Lord intends from him. 

(0 And indeed, he is witness to the goodness he is 
hesitant in giving; he cannot deny it because of its 
clarity. 

(0 And indeed, he is miserly with his wealth due to 
his extreme love for it. 

(0 Does this human, deceived by the worldly life, 
not know that when Allah will resurrect the dead 
from their graves and take them out of the earth to 
take them to account and requite them, that the mat¬ 
ter will not be as he imagines? 

@ And the intentions, beliefs etc. within the hearts 
will be made clear and apparent. 

@ Indeed, their Lord will be aware of every matter 
of theirs on that day; none of the affairs of His serv¬ 
ants will be hidden from Him, and He will requite 
them for that. 

The Striking Hour (Surah Al-QarPah) 

4*} Themes of the Surah: 

Emphasis on striking the hearts to always remem¬ 
ber the horrors of the Day of Judgement. 

4*} Explanation: 

© The hour that strikes the hearts of people be¬ 
cause of the severity of its horrors. 

© What is this hour that strikes the hearts of people 
because of the severity of its horrors? 

(0 O Messenger! And what do you know of this 
hour that strikes the hearts of people because of the 
severity of its horrors? It is the Day of Judgement. 

(0 On the day when the hearts of people will be 
struck, they will be like locusts, dispersed here and there. 

(0 And the mountains will be like carded wool, in the way they will move from their places with force. 

(0 As for the one whose good deeds will outweigh his evil deeds. 

0) He will live a contented life which he will achieve in Paradise. 

0 And as for the one whose evil deeds outweigh his good deeds, 0 His abode and permanent resting place will be hell 
on the Day of Judgement. 0 O Messenger! What do you know what that is? 0 It is the intensely hot hellfire. 


jt 



Vaj0 




mm 


Al-Qari‘ah - Al-Takathur 


Part 30 


The Piling Up (Surah Al-Takathur) 


® Themes of the Surah: 

Emphasis on reminding those engrossed in the world, of death and accountability. That is why it is also known as the 
Surah of the businessmen. 

Explanation: 

0 O people! Boasting with one another over wealth and offspring has preoccupied you from the obedience of Allah. 

0 Until you die and enter your graves. 0 It is not befitting that boasting with one another over that preoccupies you 
from the obedience of Allah; you will soon know the consequence of that preoccupation.0 You will surely realise its 
outcome. 0 Truly, if you were to know with certainty that you are to be resurrected to Allah, and that He will requite 
you for your actions, you would not become preoccupied with boasting with one another over wealth and offspring, 0 
By Allah! You will definitely witness the hellfire on the Day of Judgement. 0 Then, you will definitely see it in a way 
you will become undoubtedly convinced. 0 Then Allah will surely ask you on that day regarding the health, wealth etc. 
that He favoured you with. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. The danger of boasting with one another and being proud of wealth and offspring. 2. The disbelievers will witness the 
hellfire on the Day of Judgement. 3. On the Day of Judgement, the people will be questioned regarding the favours Allah 
favoured them with in the world. 






























y i \ i 





\y^A\f. 


o#^0oiO Lr^ 3 ; 


i? 


''°\i^\h~J&\i2fo^hZfiV 


s@cva 




0 ji4^0JjgT\ 4Co1 

Q&j\QsSj Lfa d^sfe 

0oSx^Js^ij0oX^|^4^^10o^V^ c ^ 





Time (Surah Al-‘Asr) 

® Themes of the Surah: 

Emphasis on mentioning the reality of profit and 
loss in life, whilst pointing out the value of time 
that the human lives through. 

® Explanation: 

Cjj) Allah may He be glorified takes an oath on time. 
CjS) Indeed, the human is in great loss and destruc¬ 
tion. 

@ Except for those who have faith in Allah and 
His Messenger, perform good deeds, and encourage 
each other to follow the truth and remain steadfast 
upon it. Those who have these qualities are the ones 
who are successful in the world and the afterlife. 

The Slanderer (Surah Al-Humazah) 

® Themes of the Surah: 

Emphasis on warning those who show arrogance 
and mock at the religion and its adherents. 

® Explanation: 

© Evil consequences and a severe punishment 
awaits the one who frequently backbites the people 
and taunts them. 

© The one whose only concern is to amass wealth 
and count it; he has no other concern. 

© He thinks that the wealth of his he amasses will 
save him from death, and that he will remain forev¬ 
er in this worldly life. 

© It is not as this ignorant one thinks; he will sure¬ 
ly be thrown into the fire of hell that crushes and 
breaks everything that is thrown into it, due to its 

immense strength. 

(ffi) O Messenger! What do you know of this fire that smashes everything that is thrown into it? 

1D Indeed, it is the blazing fire of Allah. 

© The fire that penetrates the bodies of the people until it reaches their hearts. 

|! Indeed, it will close up around those that will be punished with it. 

© For a prolonged, lengthy period of time, so long that they will never leave it. 

The Elephant (Surah A1-FI1) 

® Themes of the Surah: 

Emphasis on making clear the power of Allah in protecting His sacred house, as a reminder and to show His favours. 

® Explanation: 

© O Messenger! Do you not know how your Lord dealt with Abraha and his people: the people of the elephant, when 
they intended to demolish the Ka‘bah? 

jj) Allah made their evil plot to destroy it in vain; they did not achieve what they desired in trying to turn the people away 

from the Ka‘bah. They did not succeed in the slightest. 

jj) Allah sent birds upon them, who came to them in flocks upon flocks. 

© They pelted them with stones of clay. 

(0) So Allah made them like the leaves of crops that have been eaten and trampled upon by livestock. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Whoever does not bring faith, do good deeds and encourage others in remaining steadfast upon the truth and being 
patient, has lost out. 

2. Backbiting and taunting people is forbidden. 

3. Allah defends His sacred house. 


APAsr - Al-Humazah - Al-FTl 


Part 30 








































The Quraysh ( Surah Quraysh) 


B pjS=>J | 




ft 






'jj ^ ^ __ ^ ^ **? ^ ^ 

cSJ^^^jAV-Xs 0 r pjj\j a^= 4 <_c jui ^3 < 

0 ^ yaV-A-lb* % 0 


® Themes of the Surah: 

Emphasis on showing the favours of Allah upon 
the Quraysh, and what they are required to do as a 
result of that. 

® Explanation: 

CjJS) Because of the habit of the Quraysh and their 
acquaintance. 

df With travelling in the winter towards Yemen, 
and in the summer towards the Levant, in security. 

(0) They should worship Allah alone, who is the 
Lord of this sacred house. He is the one who has 
made these journeys easy for them. They should not 
ascribe any partners to Him. 

@ The one who has fed them from hunger, and giv¬ 
en them security from fear by placing reverence of 
the Haram and its inhabitants in their hearts. 

Small Kindnesses (Surah Al-Ma 6 un) 

® Themes of the Surah: 

Emphasis on mentioning the traits of the rejectors 
of religion and the afterlife, whilst warning the be¬ 
lievers and condemning the disbelievers. 

® Explanation: 

{JJ Do you recognise the one who rejects the requit¬ 
al on the Day of Judgement? 

@ It is the one who harshly turns away the orphan 
when in need. 

(jj He does not encourage himself nor others in 
feeding the poor. 

C|} So destruction and punishment be upon those 
who perform prayer. 

15 Those who are heedless of their prayer; they do not care about it such that its time expires. 

' |; Those who show off by their prayer and good deeds, not being sincere in doing deeds for Allah. 
d5 And they refrain from helping others with things in which there is no difficulty helping in. 




m 




H Quraysh - Al-Ma‘un - Al-Kawthar 51 602 




A River in Paradise (Surah Al-Kawthar) 


<!♦} Themes of the Surah: 

Emphasis on Allah’s favour upon His Prophet (peace be upon him) and cutting off the path of those who hate him. 

® Explanation: 

Cp) O Messenger! Indeed, I have granted you abundant goodness, from which is the river of Kawthar in Paradise. 
d> So be grateful to Allah for this blessing, by performing prayer for Him alone and offering sacrifice for Him, as op¬ 
posed to the offerings of sacrifice the idolaters do for their idols. 

@ Indeed, your hater is cut off from every goodness, and will be forgotten. If remembered, he will be remembered 
negatively. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. In Islam, security is important. 

2. Turning the orphan away and not encouraging others to feed the poor are traits of the disbelievers. 

3. The status of prayer in Islam is emphasised. 

4. Showing off is one of the illnesses of the heart, and it nullifies deeds. 

5. Being grateful for favours increases them. 










































0 jj SJpKa !L}£\j\ 'Jj 0 Mf-\ L ojo^jlL^j 
0 Cfe^A^ssd; j^3 0 J^U 



0"LJ\ ^ "L oti* 0 ^_*^lS *lw\jLv23 il_>-\il. 

0 




j (£) .?Aj»V^a\^ 0o4^O\i )jb^22A-^ 

r ^) -x — 

30® 


Al-Kafirun - Al-Nasr - Al-Masad 


The Disbelievers (Surah Al-Kafirun) 

® Topic of the Surah: 

Emphasis on establishing devotion in worship to 
Allah alone, and proclaiming innocence from as¬ 
cribing partners with Him, together with declaring 
complete difference between Islam and idolatry. 

® Explanation: 

(JjJ) Say, O Messenger: O those who disbelieve in 
Allah! 

@) I do not and will not worship the idols you wor¬ 
ship. 

p) Nor are you going to worship what I worship, 
.e. Allah alone. 

J) Nor am I going to worship the idols you wor¬ 
ship. 

d Nor are you going to worship what I worship, 

i.e. Allah alone. 

d You have your religion you thought up for your¬ 
selves, and I have my religion that Allah revealed 
to me. 

The Help (Surah Al-Nasr) 

® Themes of the Surah: 

Emphasis on stating the ultimate outcome of Islam 
to be that of divine help and victory, together with 
the legislation as a consequence of that. The Surah 
also subtly indicates the closeness of the death of 
the Prophet (peace be upon him). 

® Explanation: 

d O Messenger! When the help of Allah arrives 
for your religion, He honours it, and Makkah is lib¬ 


erated. 

© And you see the people entering into Islam in delegations upon delegations. 

d Then know that is a sign of the nearing of the end of your duty you were sent to fulfil. So glorify your Lord together 
with praising Him, to show gratitude to Him for the favours of help and victory, and seek His forgiveness, because indeed. 
He is the Forgiving, who accepts the repentance of His servants and forgives them. 

The Palm Fibre (Surah Al-Masad) 

® Themes of the Surah: 

Emphasis on promising the enemies of the call to Allah of disgrace and punishment in the world and the afterlife, espe¬ 
cially Abu Lahab and his wife because of the magnitude of their enmity towards the Prophet (peace be upon him). 

® Explanation: 

d Both hands of the uncle of the Prophet (peace be upon him): Abu Lahab son of ‘Abdul Muttalib have lost because of 
the loss of his actions; he used to harm the Prophet (peace be upon him). His efforts are in vain. 

d Bow much can his wealth and his children benefit him? They cannot defend him against the punishment, nor bring 
any mercy to him. 

d On the Day of Judgement, he will soon enter the flaring hellfire and suffer its heat. 

d And his wife Umm Jamil who would also harm the Prophet (peace be upon him) by throwing thorns into his path, 
will also enter it. 

d Around her neck will be tightly bound a rope with which she will be dragged into the hellfire. 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. There should be clear distinction from the disbelievers. 

2. Favours should be repaid with gratitude. 

3. Abu Lahab and his wife are both wretched. 









































Sincerity (Surah Al-Ikhlas) 


^ Topic of the Surah: 

Emphasis on affirmation of Allah being unparal¬ 
leled in perfection and divinity, and declaration of 
His being free of any defects. 

® Explanation: 

Say, O Messenger: He is Allah who is alone in 
being a deity. There is no deity except Him. 

(j$) He is the master to whom belongs all sovereign¬ 
ty and perfect, beautiful qualities. The one to whom 
all creation turn to. 

@ The one who did not give birth to anyone, nor 
did anyone give birth to Him. So He has no off¬ 
spring - may He be glorified - nor any parent. 

@ Nor does He have any equal from His creation. 

The Daybreak (Surah Al-Falaq) 


® Themes of the Surah: 

Emphasis on seeking protection and refuge in Allah 
from apparent evils. 

® Explanation: 

{J} Say, O Messenger: “I seek refuge in the Lord of 

the morning and I seek His protection.” 

fj) “From the evils of the harms of all creation.” 

@ “And I seek refuge in Allah from the evils that 
appear in the night, i.e. harmful creatures and ban¬ 
dits.” 

“And I seek His refuge from the evils of the sor¬ 
ceresses who blow onto knots.” 

@ “And I seek His refuge from the evil of the jeal¬ 
ous one when he acts out his jealousy.” 



Mankind (Surah Al-Nas) 


® Themes of the Surah: 

Emphasis on seeking refuge and protection in Allah from the evils of Satan and his whispers, and from all covert evils. 

® Explanation: 

Say, O Messenger: “I seek refuge in the Lord of mankind and seek His protection.” 

“The King of the people, who does whatever He wishes with them. They do not have any real king other than Him.” 
“He is their rightful deity; they do not have any rightful deity except Him.” 

“From the evils of Satan who whispers to the human when he is neglectful of the remembrance of Allah, or delays in 
it when he remembers.” 

{J) “He whispers to the hearts of people.” 

jj} “And he could be from the humankind or from the Jinn.” 

® Beneficial Points: 

1. Affirmation of the qualities of perfection for Allah and negation of any deficiencies from Him. 

2. Magic is affirmed to be true, and it is possible to treat it. 

3. Satanic whispers can be countered with the remembrance of Allah and seeking refuge in Him from Satan. 









































